Title: Differentially Private Retrieval-Augmented Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.14374v1

Published Time: Tue, 17 Feb 2026 02:48:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Differentially Private Retrieval-Augmented Generation 

# Tingting Tang 

University of Southern California Los Angeles, California, USA tangting@usc.edu 

# James Flemings 

University of Southern California Los Angeles, California, USA jamesf17@usc.edu 

# Yongqin Wang 

University of Southern California Los Angeles, California, USA yongqin@usc.edu 

# Murali Annavaram 

University of Southern California Los Angeles, California, USA annavara@usc.edu 

## Abstract 

Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) is a widely used framework for reducing hallucinations in large language models (LLMs) on domain-specific tasks by retrieving relevant documents from a data-base to support accurate responses. However, when the database contains sensitive corpora, such as medical records or legal doc-uments, RAG poses serious privacy risks by potentially exposing private information through its outputs. Prior work has demon-strated that one can practically craft adversarial prompts that force an LLM to regurgitate the augmented contexts. A promising di-rection is to integrate differential privacy (DP), a privacy notion that offers strong formal guarantees, into RAG systems. However, naively applying DP mechanisms into existing systems often leads to significant utility degradation. Particularly for RAG systems, DP can reduce the usefulness of the augmented contexts lead-ing to increase risk of hallucination from the LLMs. Motivated by these challenges, we present DP-KSA , a novel privacy-preserving RAG algorithm that integrates DP using the propose-test-release (PTR) paradigm. DP-KSA follows from a key observation that most question-answering (QA) queries can be sufficiently answered with a few keywords. Hence, DP-KSA first obtains an ensemble of rele-vant contexts, each of which will be used to generate a response from an LLM. We utilize these responses to obtain the most frequent keywords in a differentially private manner. Lastly, the keywords are augmented into the prompt for the final output. This approach effectively compresses the semantic space while preserving both utility and privacy. We formally show that DP-KSA provides formal DP guarantees on the generated output with respect to the RAG database. We evaluate DP-KSA on two QA benchmarks using three instruction-tuned LLMs, and our empirical results demonstrate that 

DP-KSA achieves a strong privacy-utility tradeoff. 

## Keywords 

Differential Privacy, Retrieval-Augmented Generation, Large Lan-guage Models, Data Privacy        

> This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribu-tion 4.0 International License. To view a copy of this license visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ or send a
> letter to Creative Commons, PO Box 1866, Mountain View, CA 94042, USA.
> Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies YYYY(X), 1–15
> ©YYYY Copyright held by the owner/author(s). https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX Private External
> Database 𝐷
> Generator
> Model 𝐹
> Retrieved
> Documents
> Query 𝒙
> Response 𝒚
> Generator
> Model 𝐹
> Pre -training
> Data
> RAG
> Pre -training
> Adversarial
> bound
> Retriever
> Model 𝑅

Figure 1: Overview of the DP RAG problem setting. The ad-versarial bound illustrates what capabilities the adversary has. In this case, the adversary can only query the RAG sys-tem and access the answer. The generator model has been pre-trained on publicly available data, which the adversary has access to. However, we are not concerned about preserv-ing the privacy of the pre-training data. 

## 1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) encode copious factual knowledge in their parameters through pre-training on internet-scale data [ 6]. Hence, LLMs leverage its knowledge when prompted to accurately answer queries [ 28 , 30 ]. However, the knowledge that the LLM was pre-trained on (1) may not be precisely accessed and utilized and (2) can eventually become outdated. This can lead to discrepancies between generated content by the LLM and verifiable real-world facts, known as factuality hallucinations [16]. A widely-adopted approach to mitigate hallucinations is to up-date the LLMs’ knowledge base by augmenting prompts with ex-ternal knowledge retrieved from a database, known as retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) [ 2, 22 ]. This involves retrieving the top documents from an external database that are semantically rele-vant (similar) to a user query. However, a major concern is that the external database can contain highly-sensitive information, such as Personable Identifiable Information (PII). For example, healthcare providers can leverage internal medical records to offer accurate diagnoses and tailored care recommendations, while law firms may rely on their legal case repositories to support clients in conducting legal research and preparing documentation. Several have found  

> 1
> arXiv:2602.14374v1 [cs.CR] 16 Feb 2026 Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies YYYY(X) Tang et al.

that RAG on a sensitive corpus can leak private information about individual documents in the corpus [ 17 , 29 , 36 ]. An attacker can design a specific prompt to a RAG system and use the output to reveal the information retrieved from the sensitive database. In this work, we focus on preserving the privacy of the external dataset with the following problem setup shown in Figure 1. A RAG system receives a query x. Our RAG system contains a private external dataset 𝐷 , a retriever model 𝑅 that will retrieve the top documents relevant to the query x, and a generator model 𝐹 that will use the top retrieved documents and the query to generate a response y. Our setup assumes the adversary only has query access to the RAG system to obtain responses. Hence, because the response can contain information about the retrieved documents, the adversary can adversarially craft prompts such that the response reveals information about the external database. Therefore, our goal is to design a privacy-preserving RAG system to protect private, sensitive information against such attacks. One promising privacy notion is Differential Privacy (DP) [ 11 ], which provides a mathematical guarantee that each individual in a database has limited affect on the outcome of a randomized algo-rithm. In the context of RAG, each document in the RAG database has limited influence on the output of the LLM. Although DP is the standard privacy safeguard for applications utilizing information-sensitive data, it tends to result in substantial utility degradation. To highlight the challenges that privately generating text presents, note that the response from the generator model 𝐹 iteratively sam-ples the next token 𝑦 𝑡 until a stop criteria is met, such as maximum token length reached. Hence, the range of possible values that 𝑦 𝑡 

can take is equal to the vocabulary of the generator’s tokenizer, which can be upwards of 50 , 000 . And if the maximum token length is 10 , then the output space of possible responses is at most 50 , 000 10 .Hence, naively applying standard DP mechanisms, such as addi-tive Gaussian noise, at every token generation could destroy any meaningful utility from the generated tokens. Thus, the goal our work is the following: 

How can we integrate differential privacy into practical RAG systems while preserving their utility? 

To address the above question, we propose DP-KSA , a privacy-preserving algorithm based on the propose-test-release (PTR) [ 12 ]and subsample-and-aggregate [ 27 ] paradigm for private text gen-eration illustrated in Figure 2. DP-KSA derives from a key observa-tion that most queries from question-answering datasets can be answered sufficiently with just a few keywords. Hence, we con-vert the output space of responses for question-answering tasks into a keyword subspace, then perform differentially privacy to extract the keywords. This keyword subspace mostly preserves the relative semantic representation of the original response space, i.e. it maintains the utility of the LLM while operating in a low-dimensional approximation of the entire sentence space. To achieve this, a retriever model will first retrieve the top-𝑁 documents that are most relevant to the query. Next, we partition the documents into prompts, each prompt containing a retrieved document with the corresponding query, and feed these prompts into the generator model to obtain an ensemble of responses. Then DP-KSA transforms the generated model responses into keywords that preserve relative semantic meaning and privately extracts the frequently occurring keywords in the responses via the propose-test-release paradigm. Finally, the privately obtained keywords are augmented to a prompt containing just the query, which is then fed to the LLM to generate the final output. We summarize the contributions of our work as follows: (1) We introduce DP-KSA , a simple RAG framework that pre-serves the privacy of the external database by generating a response for each of the retrieved documents from the re-triever model, then extracting a small set of keywords from the ensemble of responses. (2) We formally show that the final outputs generated by DP-KSA 

can achieve differential privacy, a strong privacy notion that gives a probable guarantee of the privacy leakage of the external database. (3) We experimentally demonstrate that DP-KSA can achieve strong privacy guarantees while preserving utility. In partic-ular, we experimentally evaluated DP-KSA on two standard benchmarking question-answering datasets with modern instruction-tuned LLMs, Qwen 2.5 [34] and Llama 3 [13]. (4) We provide comprehensive ablation studies for important hyperparameters of DP-KSA to demonstrate the robustness of DP-KSA as well as provide insights into the inner workings of DP-KSA .

## 2 Preliminary 2.1 Retrieval-Augmented Generation 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) is a hybrid architecture that augments a large language model (LLM) with an external retrieval mechanism to improve its performance on knowledge-intensive tasks. Given a user query x, a retriever model 𝑅 is first used to fetch the top-𝑁 most relevant documents from a private corpus 𝐷 . Formally, the retriever returns a set of documents 

𝐷 x 

> 1

, . . . , 𝐷 x 

> 𝑁

← 𝑅 (x, 𝐷 ; 𝑁 ) (1) where each 𝐷 x 

> 𝑖

∈ 𝐷 is deemed semantically similar to the query x.Semantic similarity is typically assessed by computing the distance between the vector representations of a query and a document. Commonly used distance functions include the dot product and cosine similarity. Each document 𝐷 x 

> 𝑖

is then paired with the query and passed into a generator model 𝐹 , which synthesizes a response: 

𝑦 𝑖 ← 𝐹 (𝐷 x 

> 𝑖

, x) (2) The outputs 𝑦 𝑖 are natural language responses that reflect the LLM’s understanding conditioned on both the query and the retrieved document. RAG offers several advantages over standalone language mod-eling. By retrieving top-𝑁 relevant documents 𝐷 x 

> 1

, . . . , 𝐷 x 

> 𝑁

from a corpus 𝐷 using a retriever 𝑅 , and conditioning generation on these documents, RAG enables dynamic grounding without retraining the generator 𝐹 . This allows models to incorporate up-to-date or domain-specific information at inference time, which is especially valuable when 𝐷 is frequently updated or too large to encode di-rectly into model parameters. A key benefit of RAG is its ability to reduce hallucinations. Since outputs 𝑦 𝑖 = 𝐹 (𝐷 x 

> 𝑖

, x) are generated with direct reference to retrieved content, responses are more likely to be factually accurate. RAG is also modular as 𝑅 and 𝐹 can be  

> 2Differentially Private RAG Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies YYYY(X)

Figure 2: The proposed DP-KSA framework consists of three steps. First, it retrieves the top-𝑁 documents most relevant to the query x from the private database 𝐷 . Each retrieved document 𝐷 x 

> 𝑖

is paired with query x and passed to the generator model 𝐹 to produce responses. Next, DP-KSA applies a differentially private mechanism to extract the most frequent keywords from the ensemble of responses. Finally, the selected keywords are combined with query x and fed back into the generator 𝐹 to produce the final output y.

trained or fine-tuned independently, enabling flexible adaptation across domains. 

## 2.2 Differential Privacy 

Differential privacy (DP) is the gold standard for reasoning about the privacy of machine learning algorithms. 

Definition 2.1 ((𝜖, 𝛿 )-DP [ 11 ]) . For 𝜖 ≥ 0, 𝛿 ∈ [ 0, 1], a randomized algorithm 𝑀 is (𝜖, 𝛿 )-differentially private if for any pair of adjacent datasets 𝐷 and 𝐷 ′ that differ in only one data point, it holds that 

𝑃𝑟 [𝑀 (𝐷 ) ∈ 𝐸 ] ≤ 𝑒 𝜖 · 𝑃𝑟 [𝑀 (𝐷 ′) ∈ 𝐸 ] + 𝛿 

The above definition indicates that if two datasets are similar, a DP algorithm should produce similar output 𝐸 with a high proba-bility so that attackers cannot infer the difference between them. In our case, 𝑀 functions as a RAG algorithm, producing answers to queries by utilizing private retrieved document as context. If this RAG algorithm adheres to differential privacy, it should generate similar outputs even when the retrieved documents vary. Conse-quently, this prohibits the generation of private information, such as replicating the retrieved context. 

2.2.1 Private Generation via Sample-and-Aggregate. There has been a body of work on generating token sequences from an LLM with DP, all of which rely on the idea of the sample-and-aggregate frame-work in DP [ 27 ]. In this framework, the sensitive dataset is parti-tioned into pairwise disjoint subsets. Then, the model will perform inference on each subset to generate a response. Lastly, the re-sponses are privately aggregated together using a DP mechanism [ 8, 31 , 33 ], such as adding Gaussian noise to the aggregation. The reason for using the sample-and-aggregate framework is that it helps with calculating the global sensitivity, which is an important property needed for DP mechanisms. If we have two neighboring datasets 𝐷 and 𝐷 ′ that differ by one document 𝑑 𝑖 , then at most one subset will differ since the document can only be contained in at most one subset (due to the pairwise disjoint property of sample-and-aggregate). Hence, changing one document changes at most one response, which we can then use to argue the global sensitivity. 

2.2.2 Private top-𝑘 selection. The private top-𝑘 selection problem is one of the most fundamental problems in privacy-preserving data analysis. The problem is given a set of candidates with corre-sponding counts, return the top-𝑘 candidates based on the counts in a privacy-preserving way [ 25 ]. In this work, we adopt an adap-tive top-𝑘 selection algorithm from Zhu and Wang [39] , which is based on the widely-known propose-test-release (PTR) framework [ 12 ]. The idea is that as long as the count difference between the 

𝑘 -th and the ( 𝑘 + 1)-th highest candidates is larger than 2, we can non-privately release the top-𝑘 candidates. 

## 3 Problem Settings 

In this section, we describe our problem settings and the threat model. 

Problem Settings. Following the problem setting in Figure 1, suppose a RAG system receives an input query x and wants to generate a response using a generator model 𝐹 . Typically 𝐹 is a decoder-only model such as LLaMA or Qwen. Also suppose the  

> 3Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies YYYY(X) Tang et al.

Figure 3: Histogram of token lengths of ground truth answers in NQ dataset. 

Figure 4: Histogram of token lengths of ground truth answers in TQA dataset. 

system has access to private external database 𝐷 to assist with answering the query. The goal is to generate the response y such that it is (𝜖, 𝛿 )-DP (definition 2.1) with respect to a private RAG database 𝐷 .

Threat Model. Additionally, our work assumes a realistic setup where an adversary can only query the RAG system with any prompt x. The adversary has access only to (1) the response y

and (2) the generator model 𝐹 . Consequently, the adversary does not have access to the external database 𝐷 . We can assume the adversary has access to the generator model, as this is usually publicly available to download from the internet. That is, the pre-training (and fine-tuning) data used to pre-train (and fine-tune) the generator LLM model is considered public and we are only concerned about preserving the privacy of the RAG database 𝐷 .

## 4 Methodology 

In this section, we introduce DP-KSA , a DP RAG framework. We begin by discussing the motivation behind the design of DP-KSA 

in Section 4.1. Then we will go through DP-KSA in more detail in Section 4.2. 

## 4.1 Motivation 

The challenge of generating differentially private text lies in the high dimensionality of the output space. The generator model 

𝐹 typically generates text autoregressively, i.e. it iteratively sam-ples the next token 𝑦 𝑡 +1 from 𝐹 by using the previously sampled tokens 𝑦 1, ..., 𝑦 𝑡 plus some provided context 𝑐 to obtain 𝑦 𝑡 +1 ∼

𝐹 (𝑦 𝑡 +1 |𝑐, 𝑦 1, ..., 𝑦 𝑡 ). Then we feed 𝑦 𝑡 +1 back to the model to sam-ple the next token until the desired stop criteria is met (either max token length reached or eos token sampled). However, the number of possible tokens that 𝑦 𝑡 +1 can realize is equal to the vocabulary space of the generator model’s tokenizer, which could be upwards to 50 , 000 . If the max generation length of the response y is 10 , then the output space of possible responses is 50 , 000 10 . Hence, naively applying DP noise each time we are generating the next token results in a large magnitude of noise, which can have a deleterious effect on the generated tokens and quickly destroy the utility. To overcome the large dimensionality of private text generation, the design of DP-KSA derives from a key observation that most question-answering datasets can be answered sufficiently with just a few keywords. To illustrate this, consider the following question-answering example from the Natural Question (NQ) dataset [ 21 ], a widely-used RAG benchmarking dataset: 

Question: who lives in the imperial palace in tokyo? 

Ground Truth Answer: the Imperial Family From this example, we see that the ground truth only contains three words (i.e., three tokens). Hence, extracting the keywords "Imperial" and "Family" would completely preserve the semantic meaning of the ground truth answer. To demonstrate that this observation holds more generally, Figure 3 and Figure 4 show the histograms of token lengths of ground truth answers in NQ dataset and Trivia Question-Answering (TQA) dataset [ 18 ], respectively. As we can see, the histograms are rightly skewed where most of the ground-truth answers contain only one to four tokens. The main takeaway here is that we can convert the task of accurately answering these questions into obtaining only a small set of correct tokens. Such a conversion effectively converts the QA task into a keyword space which can be considered as a low-dimensional approximation of the entire sequence space of correct answers. Consequently, operating in this lower dimensional space will help us preserve the utility as we integrate differential privacy into this space. 

## 4.2 DP-KSA 

As shown in Figure 2, at a high level, our algorithm proceeds in three steps: (1) retrieval and partitioning, (2) DP keyword extraction, and (3) zero-shot with DP information inference. Algorithm 1 succinctly describes DP-KSA and we go through the details below. 

Retrieval and partitioning. First, we use a retriever model 𝑅 

to obtain the top 𝑁 documents from the private database 𝐷 that are most relevant to the query x (line 1). Specifically, each document in the database is encoded into a dense vector representation by the retriever 𝑅 . At query time, the retriever encodes the input query into its own dense vector and ranks documents based on a similarity measure, typically the dot product or cosine similarity, between the query and document vectors. This process identifies the documents most semantically similar to the query. Then, for each retrieved document 𝐷 x 

> 𝑖

, we partition them into chunks with each chunk containing a retrieved document and the input query. The document is augmented with the user query to  

> 4Differentially Private RAG Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies YYYY(X)

Algorithm 1 DP-KSA 

Require: Generator model 𝐹 , retriever model 𝑅 , private database 

𝐷 , number of top documents 𝑁 , user query x, max number of generated tokens 𝑇 max 

Ensure: Generated response y 

> 1:

𝐷 x 

> 1

, ..., 𝐷 x 

> 𝑁

← 𝑅 (x, 𝐷 ; 𝑁 ) Retrieve 𝑁 most relevant documents for query x 

> 2:

for 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑁 do  

> 3:

y𝑖 ← 𝐹 (𝐷 x 

> 𝑖

, x) 

> 4:

end for  

> 5:

Form histogram H by counting the number of responses y𝑖 that contain each token.  

> 6:

ˆ𝑘 = FindBestK (H) select optimal number of keywords  

> 7:

𝑤 1, ..., 𝑤 ˆ𝑘 ← TopKWithPTR ( ˆ𝑘, H) obtain keywords  

> 8:

y ← 𝐹 (x, {𝑤 𝑖 } ˆ𝑘 𝑖 =1) zero-shot with keywords inference  

> 9:

Return y

Algorithm 2 TopKWithPTR 

Require: 𝑘 – the number of top counted tokens to release; H –histogram for the counts of each token; 𝛿 – failure probability  

> 1:

Set 𝑑 𝑘 := H(𝑘 ) − H(𝑘 +1) . 

> 2:

Set b𝑑 𝑘 := max (2, 𝑑 𝑘 ) + N ( 0, 4𝜎 2) − Φ(1 − 𝛿 ; 0 , 2𝜎 ). 

> 3:

If b𝑑 𝑘 > 2, Return the exact top-𝑘 tokens.  

> 4:

Else Terminate with no keywords. 

Algorithm 3 FindBestK 

Require: H – histogram for the counts of each token  

> 1:

Compute histogram gap 𝑑 𝑘 := H(𝑘 ) − H(𝑘 +1) for each 𝑘 =

1 . . . 𝑁 − 1. 

> 2:

Return argmax 𝑘 {𝑑 𝑘 + 𝑟 (𝑘 ) + Gumbel (2/𝜖 )} 

produce a prompt, which is fed to the generator model 𝐹 to generate a response (line 3). Afterwards, we will obtain 𝑁 responses. 

DP keyword extraction. Next, we extract keywords from the ensemble of responses y𝑖 ∀𝑖 to be used for the final prompt. The intuition behind this approach is that the answers for QA datasets typically contain a few "correct" tokens. Hence, if the retrieved documents are relevant to the query, it is likely that the correct tokens are contained in the ensemble of responses generated based on different disjoint retrieved documents. This is inspired from prior work’s use of PTR for DP text generation [33]. The key idea is that we convert keyword extraction into a private top-𝑘 selection problem, then use existing solutions in this space. To this end, we form a histogram H by counting the frequency of each word token among the responses based on the individual retrieved documents. Then we use the histogram to obtain and release the top-𝑘 tokens with the highest counts in a DP-manner. Specifically, first we adaptively estimate the optimal ˆ𝑘 to use (line 6), then extract the top- ˆ𝑘 keywords using TopKWithPTR (line 7). One subtle limitation is that applying a private selection algo-rithm, such as the exponential mechanism (EM) [ 25 ], for every keyword will require applying the EM 𝑘 times, which will decay the privacy loss 𝜖 . Hence, TopKWithPTR only needs to be applied once to obtain the top- ˆ𝑘 by testing if H(𝑘 ) − H(𝑘 +1) > 2. If the test holds, then the top-𝑘 indices are exactly the same for all the neigh-boring datasets, so we can release the exact top-𝑘 indices without any privatization. However, the test H(𝑘 ) − H(𝑘 +1) > 2 must be performed in a differentially private way, which is done with PTR (Algorithm 2). If the test fails, then no tokens can be release and hence the final prompt will resort to zero-shot. Moreover, the utility of TopKWithPTR is highest when 𝑘 is chosen to maximize H(𝑘 ) −H(𝑘 +1) . Hence, ˆ𝑘 is estimated in a data-dependent way by releasing argmax 𝑘 H(𝑘 ) − H(𝑘 +1) using EM (Algorithm 3). Here, 𝑟 (𝑘 ) is a regularizer independent of the dataset, e.g., we can set 𝑟 (𝑘 ) = −∞ for any 𝑘 > 30 and 𝑘 < 15 , if we don’t want to return more than 30 or less than 15 tokens. 

Zero-shot + DP info inference. Lastly, we use the DP released top- ˆ𝑘 tokens along with the user query x to generate the final response from the generator model y ← 𝐹 (x, {𝑤 𝑖 } ˆ𝑘 𝑖 =1) (line 9). Note that the final response does not explicitly use the retrieved documents for the final response, only the extracted keywords. If the test in the TopKWithPTR fails, then the final response will not contain any information from the external database. 

## 5 Privacy Analysis 

We now provide a formal guarantee of DP-KSA , in particular that it achieves (𝜖, 𝛿 )-DP. We provide a proof sketch below and defer the exact details in Appendix A. 

Theorem 5.1. Let x be a query received. Suppose we generate a response to x, denoted as y, using DP-KSA (Algorithm 1) with 𝐹 as the generator model, 𝑅 as the retrieval model, and 𝐷 as the private database. Then DP-KSA satisfies (𝜖, 𝛿 )-DP with respect to 𝐷 .Proof sketch. The high-level idea of the privacy analysis is that the final response y is a function of the extracted keywords 𝑤 1, ..., 𝑤 ˆ𝑘 .The keywords were obtained from the ensemble of responses, which depend on the retrieved documents from the private dataset, and an estimate for the number of keywords ˆ𝑘 , which also depends on the responses. Hence, it suffices to show that (1) FindBestK re-turn ˆ𝑘 that is differentially private with respect to 𝐷 , then show (2) 

TopKWithPTR is differentially private with respect to 𝐷 . In regards to (1), we use the exponential mechanism to achieve differential privacy on ˆ𝑘 . And (2) achieves differential privacy using standard analysis of PTR framework. For both (1) and (2), the global sensitiv-ity of the utility function 𝑑 𝑘 is 2 because that for two neighboring external datasets 𝐷 and 𝐷 ′ they differ by one document. Subse-quently, they will differ by one retrieved document, say the 𝑖 -th 

𝐷 x 

> 𝑖

≠ 𝐷 ′x 

> 𝑖

. Hence the sensitivity of the utility function 𝑑 𝑘 is 2. Once we prove these two claims, then we can invoke the post-processing theorem of DP– stating that a DP quantity does not leak additional privacy about the dataset– to argue that the final response is DP. 

Remark 5.2 . The formal proof from Appendix A is relatively straight-forward, as it relies on mostly well-established properties and theo-rems. However, we utilize Renyi Differential Privacy (RDP) [ 26 ] to perform our privacy analysis. Hence, we formally introduce and define these properties in terms of RDP in the Appendix due to spatial constraints.  

> 5Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies YYYY(X) Tang et al.

## 6 Experiments 6.1 Experimental Setup 

Dataset. To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed method, we conduct experiments on two widely used benchmark datasets in the RAG literature, Natural Questions (NQ) [ 21 ] and Trivia Question Answering (TQA) [ 18 ]. Both datasets are designed for open-domain question answering and consist of a diverse set of real-world ques-tions, each associated with multiple reference answers. Following standard RAG evaluations [ 5, 15 , 22 ], we use the Wikipedia corpus as our external knowledge source for retrieval. Due to practical constraints in computational resources, we follow prior work [ 20 ]and use a subset of 100 questions from each dataset. Note that we filter out questions with empty ground-truth references in both datasets in order to correctly compute the evaluation metrics. 

Model Architectures. Our system follows a standard retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) pipeline, composed of a retriever and a generator. For the retriever component, we adopt the Dense Pas-sage Retriever (DPR) [ 19 ], a widely used dual-encoder architecture built on top of BERT [ 6]. DPR encodes both the input question and the candidate passages into dense vector embeddings and re-trieves the most relevant documents by measuring similarity in the embedding space. In our experiment, we use the inner prod-uct as the similarity metric. In addition, given the large size of the Wikipedia corpus (21 million passages), we use FAISS [ 7] to accelerate retrieval. FAISS leverages approximate nearest neigh-bor algorithms for efficient similarity search in high-dimensional embedding spaces. For the generator, we compare several state-of-the-art large language models that have been instruction-tuned to follow user prompts. Specifically, we evaluate Qwen 2.5 (3B) [ 34 ], Llama 3.2 (3B), and Llama 3.1 (8B) [ 13 ]. The instruction-tuned versions of these models are particularly appropriate for QA tasks, as they are optimized to respond effectively to task-specific prompts. 

Baselines. We evaluate the effectiveness of DP-KSA (Algorithm 1) by comparing it against three representative baselines, each reflecting a different level of privacy and retrieval capability. The first baseline, denoted as non-RAG (𝝐 = 0), represents a strictly private setup where only the question is provided to the language model, without any access to external documents. Since no retrieval is involved, this configuration guarantees inherent privacy and serves as a minimal baseline. For DP-KSA to be considered practically useful, it must achieve better performance than this no-retrieval baseline under reasonable privacy budgets. The second baseline, labeled as KSA (𝝐 = ∞) , performs the same keyword extraction as DP-KSA but releases the top-𝐾 keywords without introducing any noise. This non-private variant effectively removes the privacy constraints while preserving the aggregation structure of our method, making it a strong upper bound for our privacy-preserving approach. The third baseline is the standard retrieval-augmented genera-tion pipeline, denoted as RAG (𝝐 = ∞) . In this setting, the ques-tion is paired with the top-2 retrieved documents from the external knowledge base, and the full documents are fed directly into the language model without any privacy protection. This setting repre-sents a theoretical upper bound in terms of utility, as it leverages full retrieval with no noise or low-dimensional approximation. 

Settings. We follow previous work [ 20 ] and set 𝛿 = 10 −4. We select 𝜖 = {1, 2, 3, 5, 8} to achieve different levels of privacy. We set the number of ensembles to 80 for our method DP-KSA and non-private KSA method, which is found to be the optimal number of ensembles and detailed later in the ablation studies in section 6.3.2 . 

Metrics. Following prior works [32, 33], we adopt four widely used evaluation metrics, F1, ROUGE-1, ROUGE-L and normalized Levenshitein similarity. These metrics collectively capture both lexi-cal overlap and semantic alignment between generated outputs and ground-truth references. The F1 score computes the harmonic mean of precision and recall, and is particularly well-suited for QA tasks where partial correctness is meaningful. It reflects how well the predicted answer tokens align with those in the reference, reward-ing both completeness and accuracy. ROUGE-1 measures unigram (i.e., single word) overlap between the prediction and the reference text. This provides a straightforward measure of lexical similarity. ROUGE-L, on the other hand, incorporates the sequential nature of language by computing the longest common subsequence (LCS), thus capturing not only which words are shared, but also whether they appear in a similar order, which is an important indicator of fluency and coherence in natural language generation. Leven-shtein similarity is derived from the Levenshtein distance, which quantifies the number of single-character insertions, deletions, or substitutions required to transform one string into another. By nor-malizing this value, we obtain a score that reflects how closely the predicted answer resembles the reference at the character level, offering a fine-grained perspective on textual similarity. Across all four metrics, higher scores indicate better alignment between the generated and ground-truth answers, and thus better performance. 

## 6.2 Privacy-Utility Tradeoff of DP-KSA 

We show the privacy-utility tradeoff of DP-KSA across four evalu-ation metrics and three different LLMs on NQ and TQA datasets. We evaluate DP-KSA with different privacy budget 𝜖 , ranging from 1 to 8. Smaller 𝜖 indicates stronger privacy constraints. We also compare our method with the non-RAG ( 𝜖 = 0), non-private KSA (𝜖 = ∞) and non-private RAG ( 𝜖 = ∞) baselines. 

6.2.1 Performance on NQ dataset. Figure 5 presents the perfor-mance of DP-KSA on the NQ dataset. Across all models and metrics, we observe a consistent performance improvement as the privacy budget 𝜖 increases from 1 to 8, confirming that DP-KSA effectively trades off privacy for utility. Notably, at moderate privacy levels (e.g. 𝜖 = 3 or 5), DP-KSA substantially outperforms the strictly pri-vate non-RAG baseline, demonstrating its ability to retain useful keywords even under noise. For instance, with Llama 3.2 (3B) as the generator, the F1 score improves from 21.67 at 𝜖 = 0 to 22.55 at 𝜖 = 2,and further to 25.18 at 𝜖 = 8, highlighting a strong privacy-utility tradeoff. However, at 𝜖 = 1, performance tends to drop below or re-main comparable to the non-RAG baseline ( 𝜖 = 0). This is likely due to the higher noise level required under strong privacy constraints, which hampers the success of the propose-test-release (PTR) con-dition H(𝑘 ) − H(𝑘 +1) > 2, resulting in fewer or no keywords being released to support final response generation. We find that DP-KSA often matches or even surpasses the perfor-mance of the non-private KSA ( 𝜖 = ∞) baseline, despite the presence of differential privacy noise. For example, using Qwen 2.5 (3B) as  

> 6Differentially Private RAG Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies YYYY(X)

Figure 5: Results of DP-KSA on NQ dataset with different generator LLMs: Qwen 2.5 (3B), Llama 3.2 (3B), and Llama 3.1 (8B). We use three baselines including non-RAG ( 𝜖 = 0), non-private RAG with top-2 retrieved documents ( 𝜖 = ∞), and non-private KSA (𝜖 = ∞). 

the generator, DP-KSA achieves ROUGE-1 and ROUGE-L scores at a moderate privacy budget ( 𝜖 = 5) that are comparable to or exceed those of non-private KSA. This suggests that a noisy histogram, constructed across ensembles of multiple responses, effectively preserves key semantic contents even in the presence of differ-ential privacy noise. Additionally, unlike non-private KSA which deterministically selects the most frequent keywords, DP-KSA ’s sto-chastic keyword release mechanism introduces variation across runs, which may help reduce overfitting to overly dominant but po-tentially less informative tokens. Overall, these findings underscore that controlled randomness applied over an ensemble of semanti-cally coherent outputs enables strong utility-privacy tradeoffs. It is also worth noting that the non-private KSA baseline gen-erally falls short of the upper bound set by the non-private RAG (𝜖 = ∞) baseline. This performance gap is likely stems from the information loss inherent in compressing an ensemble of responses into a fixed set of keywords. Exploring more effective strategies  

> 7Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies YYYY(X) Tang et al.

Figure 6: Results of DP-KSA on TQA dataset with different generator LLMs: Qwen 2.5 (3B), Llama 3.2 (3B), and Llama 3.1 (8B). We use three baselines including non-RAG ( 𝜖 = 0), non-private RAG with top-2 retrieved documents ( 𝜖 = ∞), and non-private KSA (𝜖 = ∞). 

for utilizing these extracted keywords to further narrow the perfor-mance gap remains as an important direction for future work. Interestingly, we observe that stronger generator models benefit more from DP-KSA . As we move from Qwen 2.5 (3B) to Llama 3.1 (8B), not only do we observe higher absolute scores, but also greater robustness to DP noise. This supports the intuition that larger models or certain model families are better equipped to infer context and generate meaningful outputs from partially informative or compressed prompts, making them especially well-suited for privacy-preserving QA systems. Finally, although all four evaluation metrics follow consistent upward trends as 𝜖 increases, the degree of improvement varies. Levenshtein similarity, which captures fine-grained character-level differences, improves more noticeably, suggesting that the gener-ated responses become semantically closer to the references as  

> 8Differentially Private RAG Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies YYYY(X)

privacy budget increases. ROUGE-L and F1 also show steady im-provements, confirming the DP-KSA yields gains across both string similarity and task-specific QA measures. 

6.2.2 Performance on TQA dataset. Figure 6 shows the perfor-mance of DP-KSA on the TQA dataset. Similar to the trends ob-served on NQ, we see consistent performance gains as the privacy parameter 𝜖 increases from 1 to 8, illustrating DP-KSA ’s ability to effectively trade privacy for utility. Beginning at a privacy budget of 𝜖 = 2, DP-KSA consistently outperforms the strictly private non-RAG ( 𝜖 = 0) baseline, demonstrating that even under strong privacy constraints, meaningful keywords can still be preserved. One ex-ample is when using Llama 3.2 (3B) as the generator, the F1 score improves from 55.12 at 𝜖 = 0 to 56.92 at 𝜖 = 5, indicating a strong privacy-utility tradeoff. Notably, unlike on NQ where performance at lower 𝜖 values occasionally regresses, DP-KSA on TQA exhibits smoother and more stable improvements even under tight privacy budgets. A particular interesting finding is that DP-KSA performs com-petitively against the non-private RAG ( 𝜖 = ∞) baseline in some cases. For instance, with Qwen 2.5 (3B), the ROUGE-1, ROUGE-L, and Levenshtein similarity scores at 𝜖 = 5 exceed those of the non-private RAG baseline, despite the added differential privacy noise. This suggests that using keywords from a noisy histogram formed across an ensemble of responses can yield final responses that are semantically rich as those generated with full document contexts, particularly when the retrieved context is noisy or contains more redundancy. Digging deeper into the baselines, we observe that the non-private KSA baseline actually outperforms non-private RAG in smaller models such as Qwen 2.5 (3B) and Llama 3.2 (3B), while the trend reverses for larger models like Llama 3.1 (8B). This difference can be attributed to the relative contributions of two information sources, namely the consensus of keywords captured by keyword frequency across the ensemble of 80 responses, and the parametric knowledge embedded in the generator LLM. For smaller models, the ensemble-driven signal dominates, giving KSA an advantage. However, as the generator becomes more powerful, its internal knowledge plays a larger role in improving generation quality and thus shifting the advantage toward full-context RAG. In line with these observations, DP-KSA shows greater benefits with stronger generator models. Moving from Qwen 2.5 (3B) to Llama 3.1 (8B), we see not only higher absolute performance but also improved stability across different privacy budgets. This rein-forces our earlier conclusion from the NQ results that larger and more capable models are better suited to generalize from sparse or compressed prompts, making them strong candidates for privacy-preserving RAG. Lastly, all four metrics display consistent improvement as 𝜖 in-creases, but the extent of gains varies. Levenshtein similarity and ROUGE-L tend to improve more steeply, indicating that as more keywords are released, the generated final responses become se-mantically and structurally closer to the reference answers. F1 and ROUGE-1 also improve steadily, confirming that DP-KSA remains effective across both QA-style metrics and surface-level lexical overlap. Compared to NQ, DP-KSA on TQA dataset achieves sig-nificantly higher absolute scores, likely due to its more extractive answer structure and the higher redundancy in supporting con-text, which together make it easier for DP-KSA to preserve relevant information even under privacy constraints. 

> (a) NQ
> (b) TQA

Figure 7: Propose-test-release (PTR) test pass rate of DP-KSA 

with varying privacy parameters 𝜖 on NQ and TQA datasets. We report the results with three different LLMs: Qwen 2.5 (3B), Llama 3.2 (3B), and Llama 3.1 (8B). 

6.2.3 PTR test pass rate. We analyze the effect of various privacy constraints of DP-KSA on PTR test pass rates on both NQ and TQA datasets. Following the description of our method DP-KSA in sec-tion 4.2, the propose-test-release (PTR) test checks if the condition 

H(𝑘 ) − H(𝑘 +1) > 2 holds. Figure 7 shows the pass rate changes for different privacy parameters 𝜖 , ranging from 1 to 8, across three different generator LLMs. Across both datasets, we observe a clear and consistent trend that the PTR test pass rate increases steadily as 𝜖 increases. This indicates that relaxing the privacy constraint reduces the amount of DP noise added, enabling more privately selected keywords to pass the PTR test and being released to aid the final model outputs. In other words, lower noise leads to more stable test outcomes and thus higher pass rates. This observation also supports our discussion earlier in the privacy-utility tradeoff performance on both datasets.  

> 9Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies YYYY(X) Tang et al.

When comparing across models, we find that Qwen 2.5 (3B) trails slightly behind both Llama models on NQ and TQA. The Llama 3.2 (3B) model generally achieves the highest pass rates on the NQ dataset, especially showing steep gains between 𝜖 = 1 and 𝜖 = 5.In contrast, on the TQA dataset, the Llama 3.1 (8B) model slightly outperforms the others at higher privacy budgets ( 𝜖 = 5 and 8), suggesting that its larger capacity helps identify consistent keyword patterns even under significant DP noise. These trends highlight that stronger models, particularly those in the Llama family, exhibit better resilience to DP noise and are more effective at preserving semantic signals necessary for keyword extraction. In terms of dataset differences, we observe that the TQA dataset consistently achieves higher PTR pass rates than NQ across all models and 𝜖 values. Even at 𝑒𝑝𝑠𝑖𝑙𝑜𝑛 = 1, models on TQA start from a noticeably higher baseline. This discrepancy likely stems from differences in dataset structure. TQA answers tend to be more extractive and contextually redundant, which helps generate more consistent keyword distributions across ensembles. As a result, keywords in TQA are easier to identify under the added DP noise. 

## 6.3 Ablation Studies 

We also conduct ablation studies with varying model sizes and number of ensembles on NQ dataset to investigate how these hyper-parameters affect the performance of our proposed method DP-KSA .

6.3.1 Effect of Model Size. Figure 8 illustrates the impact of model size on the performance of DP-KSA across all four metrics, F1, ROUGE-1, ROUGE-L and Levenshtein similarity, under a fixed pri-vacy budget of 𝜖 = 3, along with non-private baselines for compar-ison. In this experiment, we evaluate the Qwen 2.5 model family at four scales, 1.5B , 3B, 7B and 32B. To accommodate hardware memory limitations, we use 4-bit quantization to the 32B model weights, ensuring that all models can be evaluated under the same computational constraints. As expected, larger models consistently achieve better perfor-mance across most metrics. As model size increases, we observe steady gains in F1 and ROUGE scores under the privacy-preserving setting, indicating that more expressive LLMs are more capable of compensating for the restricted input caused by providing only keywords as context in the prompts. Notably, even under a mod-erate privacy constraint of 𝜖 = 3, the 32B model nearly matches the performance of the fully non-private RAG baseline ( 𝜖 = ∞), demonstrating that DP-KSA benefits substantially from scaling to larger model capacities. Interestingly, however, we observe a decline in Levenshtein sim-ilarity as model size increases to 32B. This seemingly counterintu-itive trend can be explained by the generative behavior of larger models. Bigger LLMs, such as Qwen 2.5 (32B), are more likely to paraphrase reference answers with greater fluency and lexical diver-sity. While these outputs may be semantically accurate, they diverge more from the reference at the character level, which directly low-ers Levenshtein similarity. Larger models may also produce longer or more elaborative responses, introducing more edits even if se-mantically valid, while smaller models are more conservative and literal in their generations. Therefore, the drop in Levenshtein sim-ilarity should be interpreted not as a sign of degraded quality, but rather as a side effect of more fluent and paraphrastic generation. 

Figure 8: Ablation studies on model sizes with Qwen 2.5 model family on NQ dataset. Model size axis is in log scale. 

At the other end of the scale, the smallest model size (1.5B) re-veals an unusual pattern. The non-RAG baseline ( 𝜖 = 0), where only the question is given without any retrieved context, outperforms both the non-private KSA and DP-KSA (𝜖 = 3) settings. This can be explained by the weaker instruction-following capabilities of smaller models. When provided with prompts using keyword-only context, whether deterministic (KSA) or noisy ( DP-KSA ), these mod-els struggle to interpret and integrate sparse cues into coherent answers. In contrast, the non-RAG setting, which presents only the raw question, may align better with the pretraining distribution of small models and avoid potential confusion from prompts with in-complete or overly narrow keywords as context. Consequently, the model relies more heavily on its parametric knowledge, sometimes yielding better outputs than poorly constructed context. Moreover, between KSA and DP-KSA (𝜖 = 3) at 1.5B, the latter surprisingly performs better. One possible reason is that the sto-chastic nature of DP-KSA introduces diversity into the prompts, occasionally surfacing less frequent but semantically useful tokens. This noise-driven variation can act as a form of regularization that prevents the model from overfitting to dominant but uninformative keywords and this is a vulnerability particularly pronounced in smaller models. Overall, these findings underscores that larger models are not only more effective at leveraging prompts with sparse context but also more robust to the limitations imposed by differential privacy. They suggest that DP-KSA is best paired with instruction-following-capable LLMs to achieve strong privacy-utility tradeoffs.  

> 10 Differentially Private RAG Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies YYYY(X)

Figure 9: Ablation studies on number of ensembles with Llama 3.2 (3B) model and 𝜖 = 3 on NQ dataset. 

6.3.2 Effect of Number of Ensembles. Figure 9 shows how the num-ber of retrieval ensembles impacts the performance of DP-KSA . In this experiment, we use the Llama 3.2 (3B) generator model and fix the privacy budget at 𝜖 = 3, while varying the number of en-sembles from 10 to 100. The number of ensembles reflects how many top-ranked documents are used from retrieval. For instance, an ensemble size of 10 uses the top 10 retrieved documents, while a size of 50 incorporates the top 50. Each ensemble corresponds to a different retrieved document used to prompt the generator, and their aggregated responses are used to construct a noisy token histogram for differentially private keyword selection. We observe a clear progression in performance trends across all four evaluation metrics as the number of ensembles increases. When using between 10 and 40 ensembles, performance remains relatively stable. This indicates that aggregating a limited number of ensembles does not provide sufficient signal strength to overcome the DP noise introduced. With few ensembles, informative tokens may appear sporadically across responses, leading to sparse or inconsistent histograms where the DP mechanism struggles to identify high-frequency keywords reliably. As the number of ensembles increases from 40 to 80, performance improves steadily. The addition of more ensembles enriches the token histogram, making it more representative and resilient to DP noise. Recurrent tokens consistently appearing across semantically relevant responses emerge more clearly, enabling the stochastic keyword release mechanism to retain more meaningful and infor-mative content. The growing diversity of responses within this range plays a key role in stabilizing the keyword selection process under DP constraints. Between 80 and 100 ensembles, performance begins to plateau. While more ensembles continue to be aggregated, the marginal gains diminish. Additional documents may contribute less relevant or redundant information, increasing the presence of low-utility or noisy tokens in the histogram. This can dilute the quality of the extracted keywords and limit further improvements in the final output quality. These findings indicate that while increasing the number of en-sembles can significantly enhance performance under DP, there are diminishing returns beyond a certain point. Once the ensemble size becomes large enough to establish a stable token distribution, adding more documents does little to improve and may even slightly degrade the quality of the extracted keywords due to the introduc-tion of irrelevant or noisy content. This highlights the need for more strategic methods for selecting the number of ensembles to further boost performance without compromising the privacy guarantee. 

## 7 Related Work 7.1 Privacy Attacks on Large Language Models 

Prior work has shown that large language models (LLMs) are vulner-able to privacy breaches through a variety of attack vectors. Carlini et al . [4] demonstrated that adversaries can extract memorized training examples, such as email addresses, phone numbers, and other sensitive content, by carefully crafting input prompts. These training data extraction attacks reveal that even models trained on supposedly de-identified datasets can still memorize and regurgitate specific private data points. Prompt extraction attacks [ 9, 24 , 38 ]have also received significant attention. These attacks target de-ployed systems where users provide prompts that encode propri-etary logic, credentials, or task-specific templates. Adversaries can use model inversion, gradient leakage, or black-box probing to in-fer the original prompts, threatening the confidentiality of model customization and user inputs in commercial APIs. In the context of retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), recent work has highlighted privacy risks stemming from both the retrieval and generation components. Huang et al . [17] analyzed 𝑘 NN-LMs and showed that retrieved neighbors from the training corpus can expose private information, especially when the distance function reveals document structure or content characteristics. Zeng et al .[36] conducted a systematic investigation into open-source RAG pipelines and found that sensitive data in the retrieval corpus can propagate into generated responses without explicit prompts, par-ticularly when the retriever ranks memorized or high-sensitivity content highly. Qi et al . [29] extended these findings to commer-cial production-level RAG systems, showing that the configuration of RAG, including retrieval granularity, document ranking, and prompt construction, can significantly influence the model’s sus-ceptibility to data leakage. Together, these studies underline the importance of privacy-aware design to mitigate the growing threat of information leakage in retrieval-augmented language generation. 

## 7.2 Privacy-Preserving Large Language Models 

Differential privacy has been studied in many tasks in large lan-guage models. The differentially private pretraining and finetuning of LLMs have been studied to address the privacy concern in the training data by deploying DP-SGD [ 1]. In this paradigm, noise is introduced to the gradient during the model’s training to en-sure privacy. However, as the scale of the large language models significantly increased, memory becomes a large bottleneck and makes this approach more challenging in practice. Although recent methods have been proposed for efficient per-example gradient clipping [ 23 ] and parameter-efficient fine-tuning [ 35 ], it remains a topic of ongoing research in order to address the engineering and optimization problems introduced by DP-SGD. In-context learning adapts to different tasks by illustrating some examples in the con-text as the task description. DP in-context learning considers the 

> 11

Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies YYYY(X) Tang et al. 

situation when the examples are picked from any private dataset. [ 31 ] tackles this problem by generating synthetic examples with DP. [ 33 ] instead uses a sample-and-aggregate algorithm to generate DP responses. To mitigate privacy risks in RAG systems, [ 37 ] proposed an empirical privacy-preserving algorithm for RAG through the syn-thetic data generation, while our work studies privacy-preserving RAG in the framework of differential privacy, which protects the privacy of each individual document with the theoretical guaran-tee. Closely-related prior works have proposed DP solutions in the RAG setting by applying DP at every token generation of the LLM [ 14 , 20 ] after retrieving relevant documents. While they offer privacy protection for RAG systems, they come with noticeable limitations. Per-iteration private voting requires composing the privacy loss over the number of tokens being generated, which quickly destroys the privacy-utility tradeoff. 

## 8 Conclusion 

In this paper, we presented DP-KSA , a novel privacy-preserving al-gorithm that ensures differential privacy for sensitive external data source in the RAG system, enabling us to enhance LLMs by domain-specific but sensitive external data source. DP-KSA privatizes RAG by extracting the most frequent keywords based on the "propose-test-release" paradigm and augmenting them into the prompt to generate the final output. The privately extracted keywords ef-fectively compresses the semantic space while still retaining key information pertaining to the retrieved contexts for better utility. The experiments on QA benchmarking datasets show that our algo-rithm outperforms the non-RAG method under moderate privacy budgets across different models, demonstrating its effectiveness for maintaining high generation quality while providing formal privacy guarantees. We also explored and evaluated the impact of generator model sizes and number of ensembles on our method. In future work, we will consider a more adaptive scheme for selecting the number of ensembles to further improve privacy-utility tradeoffs across different generator model families and sizes. While DP-KSA targets scenarios where the external retrieval corpus is private and the generator LLM is trained on publicly available data, commonly seen in real-world RAG systems using open-source models, it is also worth investigating how DP-KSA affects the train-ing data leakage risks when the generator LLM is pre-trained or fine-tuned on private datasets. 

## Acknowledgment 

The authors used Grammarly and ChatGPT4.o to detect and correct grammatical errors in this paper. 

## References 

[1] Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H. Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and Li Zhang. 2016. Deep Learning with Differential Privacy. In 

Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (Vienna, Austria) (CCS ’16) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 308–318. https://doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978318 [2] Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2024. Self-RAG: Learning to Retrieve, Generate, and Critique through Self-Reflection. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .https://openreview.net/forum?id=hSyW5go0v8 [3] Mark Bun and Thomas Steinke. 2016. Concentrated differential privacy: Simpli-fications, extensions, and lower bounds. In Theory of cryptography conference .Springer, 635–658. [4] Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Katherine Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn Song, Ulfar Erlingsson, et al . 2021. Extracting training data from large language models. In 30th USENIX security symposium (USENIX Security 21) . 2633–2650. [5] Danqi Chen, Adam Fisch, Jason Weston, and Antoine Bordes. 2017. Reading Wikipedia to Answer Open-Domain Questions. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,Regina Barzilay and Min-Yen Kan (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguis-tics, Vancouver, Canada, 1870–1879. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1171 [6] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. In 

Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and Thamar Solorio (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 4171–4186. https://doi. org/10.18653/v1/N19-1423 [7] Matthijs Douze, Alexandr Guzhva, Chengqi Deng, Jeff Johnson, Gergely Szilvasy, Pierre-Emmanuel Mazaré, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, and Hervé Jégou. 2025. The Faiss library. arXiv:2401.08281 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.08281 [8] Haonan Duan, Adam Dziedzic, Nicolas Papernot, and Franziska Boenisch. 2023. Flocks of stochastic parrots: Differentially private prompt learning for large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023), 76852–76871. [9] Haonan Duan, Adam Dziedzic, Mohammad Yaghini, Nicolas Papernot, and Franziska Boenisch. 2023. On the privacy risk of in-context learning. In The 61st Annual Meeting Of The Association For Computational Linguistics .[10] David Durfee and Ryan M Rogers. 2019. Practical differentially private top-k selection with pay-what-you-get composition. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 (2019). [11] Cynthia Dwork. 2006. Differential privacy. In International colloquium on au-tomata, languages, and programming . Springer, 1–12. [12] Cynthia Dwork and Jing Lei. 2009. Differential privacy and robust statistics. In 

Proceedings of the Forty-First Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing 

(Bethesda, MD, USA) (STOC ’09) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 371–380. https://doi.org/10.1145/1536414.1536466 [13] Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, et al . 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 

(2024). [14] Nicolas Grislain. 2025. RAG with Differential Privacy. arXiv:2412.19291 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.19291 [15] Jennifer Hsia, Afreen Shaikh, Zhiruo Wang, and Graham Neubig. 2024. Ragged: Towards informed design of retrieval augmented generation systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09040 (2024). [16] Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong, Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong Chen, Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, et al . 2025. A survey on hallucination in large language models: Principles, taxonomy, chal-lenges, and open questions. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 43, 2 (2025), 1–55. [17] Yangsibo Huang, Samyak Gupta, Zexuan Zhong, Kai Li, and Danqi Chen. 2023. Privacy Implications of Retrieval-Based Language Models. In EMNLP .[18] Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2017. TriviaQA: A Large Scale Distantly Supervised Challenge Dataset for Reading Comprehension. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , Regina Barzilay and Min-Yen Kan (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Vancouver, Canada, 1601–1611. https: //doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1147 [19] Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oguz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. 2020. Dense Passage Retrieval for Open-Domain Question Answering. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , Bonnie Webber, Trevor Cohn, Yulan He, and Yang Liu (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 6769–6781. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.550 [20] Tatsuki Koga, Ruihan Wu, and Kamalika Chaudhuri. 2025. Privacy-Preserving Retrieval-Augmented Generation with Differential Privacy. arXiv:2412.04697 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.04697 [21] Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion Jones, Matthew Kelcey, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew M. Dai, Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav Petrov. 2019. Natural Questions: A Benchmark for Question Answering Research. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 7 (2019), 452–466. https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00276 [22] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (Vancouver, BC, Canada) (NIPS ’20) .12 Differentially Private RAG Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies YYYY(X) 

Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, Article 793, 16 pages. [23] Xuechen Li, Florian Tramèr, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. 2022. Large Language Models Can Be Strong Differentially Private Learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.05679. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.05679 [24] Yi Liu, Gelei Deng, Yuekang Li, Kailong Wang, Zihao Wang, Xiaofeng Wang, Tianwei Zhang, Yepang Liu, Haoyu Wang, Yan Zheng, et al . 2023. Prompt Injec-tion attack against LLM-integrated Applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05499 

(2023). [25] Frank McSherry and Kunal Talwar. 2007. Mechanism design via differential privacy. In 48th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS’07) . IEEE, 94–103. [26] Ilya Mironov. 2017. Rényi differential privacy. In 2017 IEEE 30th computer security foundations symposium (CSF) . IEEE, 263–275. [27] Kobbi Nissim, Sofya Raskhodnikova, and Adam Smith. 2007. Smooth sensitivity and sampling in private data analysis. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Ninth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (San Diego, California, USA) (STOC ’07) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 75–84. https: //doi.org/10.1145/1250790.1250803 [28] Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, Alexander H Miller, and Sebastian Riedel. 2019. Language models as knowledge bases? arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01066 (2019). [29] Zhenting Qi, Hanlin Zhang, Eric P. Xing, Sham M. Kakade, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. 2025. Follow My Instruction and Spill the Beans: Scalable Data Extraction from Retrieval-Augmented Generation Systems. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations . https://openreview.net/ forum?id=Y4aWwRh25b [30] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al . 2019. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog 

1, 8 (2019), 9. [31] Xinyu Tang, Richard Shin, Huseyin A Inan, Andre Manoel, Fatemehsadat Mireshghallah, Zinan Lin, Sivakanth Gopi, Janardhan Kulkarni, and Robert Sim. 2024. Privacy-Preserving In-Context Learning with Differentially Private Few-Shot Generation. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions . https://openreview.net/forum?id=oZtt0pRnOl [32] Yuhao Wang, Ruiyang Ren, Junyi Li, Wayne Xin Zhao, Jing Liu, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2024. REAR: A Relevance-Aware Retrieval-Augmented Framework for Open-Domain Question Answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17497 (2024). [33] Tong Wu, Ashwinee Panda, Jiachen T Wang, and Prateek Mittal. 2023. Privacy-preserving in-context learning for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.01639 (2023). [34] An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Pei Zhang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Runji Lin, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Tingyu Xia, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zihan Qiu. 2025. Qwen2.5 Technical Report. arXiv:2412.15115 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15115 [35] Da Yu, Saurabh Naik, Arturs Backurs, Sivakanth Gopi, Huseyin A Inan, Gautam Kamath, Janardhan Kulkarni, Yin Tat Lee, Andre Manoel, Lukas Wutschitz, et al .2022. Differentially private fine-tuning of language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .[36] Shenglai Zeng, Jiankun Zhang, Pengfei He, Yiding Liu, Yue Xing, Han Xu, Jie Ren, Yi Chang, Shuaiqiang Wang, Dawei Yin, and Jiliang Tang. 2024. The Good and The Bad: Exploring Privacy Issues in Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG). In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Bangkok, Thailand, 4505–4524. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024. findings-acl.267 [37] Shenglai Zeng, Jiankun Zhang, Pengfei He, Jie Ren, Tianqi Zheng, Hanqing Lu, Han Xu, Hui Liu, Yue Xing, and Jiliang Tang. 2025. Mitigating the Pri-vacy Issues in Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) via Pure Synthetic Data. arXiv:2406.14773 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.14773 [38] Yiming Zhang, Nicholas Carlini, and Daphne Ippolito. 2023. Effective prompt extraction from language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06865 (2023). [39] Yuqing Zhu and Yu-Xiang Wang. 2022. Adaptive private-k-selection with adaptive k and application to multi-label pate. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics . PMLR, 5622–5635. 13 Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies YYYY(X) Tang et al. 

## A Privacy Analysis of DP-KSA 

We now provide technical details behind the privacy analysis of 

DP-KSA . We first introduce some definitions and theorems to help with the analysis. 

## A.1 Relevant Properties 

In the main text, we introduced (𝜖, 𝛿 )-DP (Definition 2.1). Addition-ally, we will introduce Rényi Differential Privacy (RDP), a variant of (𝜖, 𝛿 )-DP that uses Rényi divergence to measure the difference between 𝑀 (𝐷 ) and 𝑀 (𝐷 ′).

Definition A.1 (Rényi Divergence) . For two probability distribu-tions 𝑃 and 𝑄 defined over R, the Rényi divergence of order 𝛼 > 1

is 

𝐷 𝛼 (𝑃 || 𝑄 ) = 1

𝛼 − 1 log E𝑥 ∼𝑄 

 𝑃 (𝑥 )

𝑄 (𝑥 )

𝛼 

.

Definition A.2. ((𝛼, 𝜖 (𝛼 )) -RDP [ 26 ]) A randomized algorithm 

𝑀 : D → R is (𝜖 (𝛼 ), 𝛼 )-RDP if for any adjacent datasets 𝐷, 𝐷 ′ ∈ D 

it holds that 𝐷 𝛼 (𝑀 (𝐷 )|| 𝑀 (𝐷 ′)) ≤ 𝜖 (𝛼 ).

An advantage of RDP is its convenient composition properties, which states that the privacy loss of the composition of multiple RDP algorithms is simply the sum of each RDP algorithm. We state this more formally below. 

Theorem A.3 (Composition [ 26 ]) . Let 𝐴 1, ..., 𝐴 𝑘 be a sequence of 

(𝛼, 𝜖 (𝛼 )) -RDP algorithms. Then the composition 𝐴 𝑘 ◦ 𝐴 𝑘 −1 ◦ ... ◦ 𝐴 1

is (𝛼, 𝑘𝜖 (𝛼 )) -RDP. 

Another important property of RDP, and more generally DP, is that any further operations on the output of an RDP algorithm does not leak additional information, called the post-processing property. 

Theorem A.4 (Post-Processing [ 26 ]) . Let 𝐴 : D → R be (𝛼, 𝜖 (𝛼 )) -RDP, and let 𝐹 : R → Z be an arbitrary randomized mapping. Then 

𝐹 ◦ 𝑀 is (𝛼, 𝜖 (𝛼 )) -RDP. 

Another useful relaxation of the RDP definition is approximate RDP. 

Definition A.5 (Approximate RDP [ 3, 39 ]) . We say a randomized algorithm 𝑀 is 𝛿 -approximately (𝛼, 𝜖 𝑀 (𝛼 )) -RDP with order 𝛼 ≥ 1,if for all neighboring dataset 𝐷, 𝐷 ′, there exist events 𝐸 (depending on 𝑀 (𝐷 )) and 𝐸 ′ (depending on 𝑀 (𝐷 ′)) such that Pr [𝐸 ] ≥ 1 − 𝛿 

and Pr [𝐸 ′] ≥ 1 − 𝛿 , and ∀𝛼 ≥ 1, we have 

𝐷 𝛼 (𝑀 (𝐷 )| 𝐸 ∥ 𝑀 (𝐷 ′) | 𝐸 ′) ≤ 𝜖 𝑀 (𝛼 ) (3) Note that when 𝛿 = 0, then 0-approximate (𝛼, 𝜖 (𝛼 )) -RDP is sim-ply (𝛼, 𝜖 (𝑎𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎 )) -RDP. Finally, we can convert between (𝛼, 𝜖 (𝛼 )) 

and (𝜖, 𝛿 )-DP, which is shown below. 

Theorem A.6 (Conversion from approximate RDP to Approximate DP [ 39 ]) . If an algorithm 𝐴 satisfies 𝛿 1-approximate (𝛼, 𝜖 (𝛼 )) -RDP, then it is (𝜖 (𝛼 ) + log (1/𝛿 )  

> 𝛼 −1

, 𝛿 + 𝛿 1)-DP for any 0 < 𝛿 < 1.

We use approximate RDP for a tighter measure of the privacy cost under composition. After we obtain the (approximate) RDP guarantee for the overall algorithm, we can then convert the privacy guarantee back into the standard DP definition (Theorem A.6). Lastly, we introduce a fundamental DP mechanism, called the exponential mechanism [ 25 ], which the FindBestK is based on. Given some utility function over outputs, the exponential mech-anism samples high-utility outputs with higher probability than low-utility outputs. 

Definition A.7 (Exponential Mechanism [ 25 ]) . Given a utility func-tion 𝑞 : X∗×O → R with ℓ1 sensitivity Δ(𝑞 ) = max 𝐷 ∼𝐷 ′,𝑜 ∈𝑂 |𝑞 (𝐷, 𝑜 )− 

𝑞 (𝐷 ′, 𝑜 )| , the exponential mechanism 𝑀 has output distribution 

Pr [𝑀 (𝐷 ) = 𝑜 ] ∝ exp 

 𝜖𝑞 (𝐷, 𝑜 )

2Δ(𝑞 )



.

where ∝ elides the normalization factor. Given the above definition, one can show that the exponential mechanism satisfies (𝜖, 0)-DP. 

Lemma A.8 ([25]) . The exponential mechanism is (𝜖, 0)-DP. 

Since we want to compose the privacy loss of the exponential mechanism and report the loss in terms of (𝜖, 𝛿 )-DP, we use the following property to convert from 𝜖 -DP to (𝛼, 𝜖 (𝛼 )) -RDP. 

Theorem A.9 ([ 3]) . The 𝑀 is 𝜖 -DP then it is (𝛼, 𝜖 EM (𝛼 )) -RDP where 

𝜖 EM (𝛼 ) := min 

 𝛼 

2 𝜖 2, 1

𝛼 − 1 log 

 sinh (𝛼𝜖 ) − sinh (( 𝛼 − 1)𝜖 )

sinh (𝜖 )

 

.

## A.2 Privacy Analysis 

Now we will prove that DP-KSA satisfies (𝜖, 𝛿 )-DP. First, we obtain a privacy guarantee for TopKWithPTR and FindBestK .

Theorem A.10. TopKWithPTR (Algorithm 2) is 𝛿 -approximate 𝛼  

> 2𝜎 2

-RDP. 

Proof. The privacy analysis mostly follows from Zhu and Wang [39]. Releasing the noisy threshold b𝑑 𝑘 is 𝛼  

> 2𝜎 2

-RDP. If 𝑑 𝑘 > 2, then releasing the exact top-𝑘 tokens has no privacy cost, as its local sensitivity is 0. If 𝑑 𝑘 ≤ 2, then if b𝑑 𝑘 ≤ 2, the program terminates and there’s no privacy cost. If 𝑑 𝑘 ≤ 2, the failure probability 

Pr [b𝑑 𝑘 > 2] = Pr [max (2, 𝑑 𝑘 ) + N ( 0, 4𝜎 2) − Φ(1 − 𝛿 ; 0 , 2𝜎 ) > 2]

= Pr [2 + N ( 0, 4𝜎 2) − Φ(1 − 𝛿 ; 0 , 2𝜎 ) > 2]

= Pr [N ( 0, 4𝜎 2) − Φ(1 − 𝛿 ; 0 , 2𝜎 ) > 0]

= 𝛿 

□

Theorem A.11. FindBestK (Algorithm 3) satisfies (𝛼, 𝜖 EM (𝛼 )) -RDP. 

Proof. Note that adding Gumbel noise to each output’s utility and releasing the output with the highest noisy utility score is equiv-alent to using the exponential mechanism [ 10 ]. Hence, FindBestK 

is an EM where the utility function is 𝑑 𝑘 = H(𝑘 ) − H(𝑘 +1) with the sensitivity Δ(𝑑 𝑘 ) = 2 (this arguement derives from Zhu and Wang [39] ). Therefore, the privacy guarantee follows from Theorem A.9. □

Theorem A.12. DP-KSA (Algorithm 1) satisfies (𝜖, 𝛿 )-DP.  

> 14 Differentially Private RAG Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies YYYY(X)

Proof. Let 𝐷, 𝐷 ′ be two adjacent datasets the differ by one doc-ument. Hence, after retrieving the 𝑁 most relevant documents for a query x, 𝑅 (x, 𝐷 ; 𝑁 ) and 𝑅 (x, 𝐷 ′; 𝑁 ) differ by at most one document. Suppose it is the 𝑖 -th document. More precisely, 𝐷 x 

> 𝑗

= 𝐷 ′x 

> 𝑗

∀𝑗 ≠ 𝑖 

and 𝐷 x 

> 𝑖

≠ 𝐷 ′x 

> 𝑖

. Then we obtain the corresponding histograms H

and H′, which differ by one response y𝑖 ≠ y′ 

> 𝑖

. Hence by Theo-rem A.11 ˆ𝑘 is (𝛼, 𝜖 EM (𝛼 )) -RDP. Then using ˆ𝑘 we have 𝑤 1, ..., 𝑤 ˆ𝑘 ,which are 𝛿 1-approximate 𝛼  

> 2𝜎 2

-RDP by Theorem A.10. Then by composition (Theorem A.3) the total privacy loss is 𝛿 1-approximate 

(𝛼, 𝜖 EM (𝛼 ) + 𝛼  

> 2𝜎 2

)-RDP. Moreover, because 𝑤 1, ..., 𝑤 ˆ𝑘 are RDP, any further operations on them do not leak additional privacy by post-processing (Theorem A.4). Hence, using 𝑤 1, ..., 𝑤 ˆ𝑘 for obtaining the final output y ← 𝐹 (x, {𝑤 𝑖 } ˆ𝑘 𝑖 =1) is DP. Finally we convert the final privacy loss back to (𝜖, 𝛿 )-DP using Theorem A.6. □