Title: ABCD: All Biases Come Disguised

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.17445v1

Published Time: Fri, 20 Feb 2026 02:00:36 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# ABCD: All Biases Come Disguised 

Mateusz Nowak ∗ Xavier Cadet ∗ Peter Chin 

Dartmouth College 

Abstract 

Multiple-choice question (MCQ) benchmarks have been a standard evaluation prac-tice for measuring LLMs’ ability to reason and answer knowledge-based questions. Through a synthetic NonsenseQA benchmark, we observe that different LLMs exhibit varying degrees of label-position-few-shot-prompt bias, where the model either uses the answer position, the label in front of the answer, the distributions of correct answers present in the few-shot prompt, or a combination of all to answer each MCQ question. We propose a simple bias-reduced evaluation protocol that replaces the labels of each question with uniform, unordered labels and prompts the LLM to use the whole answer presented. With a simple sentence similarity model, we demonstrate improved robustness and lower standard deviation between different permutations of answers with a minimal drop in LLM’s performance, ex-posing the LLM’s capabilities under reduced evaluation artifacts, without any help from the prompt examples or the option labels. Across multiple benchmarks and models, this protocol substantially improves the robustness to answer permutations, reducing mean accuracy variance 3× with only a minimal decrease in the mean model’s performance. Through ablation studies on various embedding models and similarity functions, we show that the method is more robust than the standard ones. 

1 Introduction 

Multiple-choice questions (MCQs) are a standard paradigm for evaluating the reasoning and question-answering capabilities of large language models (LLMs), spanning benchmarks from commonsense reasoning (CommonsenseQA; CSQA) [ 29 ] to graduate-level, Google-proof scientific questions (GPQA) [ 23 ]. However, more broadly, many real-world decision-making scenarios can be cast as MCQs by just enumerating candidate options. However, LLMs are known to be sensitive to superficial MCQ artifacts. Zheng et al. [39] shows that an “answer-moving attack”, which simply moves the golden answer to a specific position, causes LLMs’ dramatic performance fluctuations. Building upon this work, Zhou et al. [40] evaluates the influence of position shuffling, label replacement with emoji symbols, and format question change to True/False, showing that the decline in accuracy is more pronounced for option label replacement than for position shuffle. While [ 39 ] demonstrated position and label bias through ”answer-moving attacks”, they did not investigate how models exploit patterns in few-shot examples. Building upon both works, we reveal a critical dimension not explored in prior research: few-shot prompt distribution bias. We propose NonsenseQA , a simple synthetic dataset of random-word questions and options with a randomly assigned correct answer, to quantify evaluation biases. Using NonsenseQA, we demonstrate that different models exhibit fundamentally different behaviors: some models explicitly exploit the few-shot answer distribution in their reasoning to reach > 95% accuracy on meaningless inputs, 

> ∗

Equal contribution Preprint. 

> arXiv:2602.17445v1 [cs.CL] 19 Feb 2026

while others achieve only ∼ 40% without explicitly referencing the prompt examples, showing that MCQ bias is more complex and model-specific than previously. Building on insights from NonsenseQA, we propose a bias-reduced evaluation protocol for multiple-choice LLM assessment. The protocol uses homogenous, unordered option labels and requires full-text answer generation, minimizing exploitable artifacts while improving robustness. Under this setting, models achieve near-chance accuracy on NonsenseQA while incurring only minimal performance degradation on standard MCQ benchmarks. To accommodate paraphrased answers, we match generated responses to candidate options using semantic similarity. We evaluate the protocol across 13 LLMs and five benchmarks -– MMLU-Pro [ 34 ], GPQA [ 23 ], CommonsenseQA [ 29 ], ARC [ 8 ], and a subset of INCLUDE [ 27 ]. The results show an improved robustness, reflected in the combination of a higher SCORE [ 19 ] with reduced variance ratio. Ablation studies confirm that performance is stable across similarity models and matching functions. The contributions of this paper are: • Simple practical evaluation debiasing solution : We propose a simple, single-pass, bias-reduced MCQ evaluation standard that combines uniform option labels, full-text answer generation, and semantic matching, requiring neither model fine-tuning nor access to raw output probabilities, while substantially reducing shortcut exploitation and only requiring an additional 3% computation time. We evaluate our design on multiple benchmarks, motivating our design choices with thorough ablation studies. • NonsenseQA : We propose a debiasing tool, the NonsenseQA dataset, that uses random words to show different biases present within LLMs when it comes to question answering, ranging from labels used to present the answer, the mode of the answer, the position of the answer, and the distribution of the correct answers present in the few-shot prompt. • Few-shot prompt and answer format bias analysis : We identify and characterize pre-viously underexplored biases in MCQ-based LLM evaluation, including few-shot answer distribution bias and answer-mode bias, and demonstrate that these artifacts can be sys-tematically exploited even on semantically meaningless inputs using our new diagnostic dataset. 

2 Related work 

Prior LLM evaluation on multiple-choice questions (MCQs) has largely relied on cloze-style for-mulations, where models select the option with the highest probability. However, predicting option symbols (e.g, “A”) through multiple-choice symbol binding (MCSB) was shown to improve the LLM’s performance [ 26 ], and first-token prediction was demonstrated to be brittle to prompt phrasing and misaligned with full-text answer preferences in instruction-tuned models [33]. Nevertheless, standard MCSB-based MCQ protocols suffer from a range of its own biases, including sensitivity to option labels [ 39 , 40 ], answer position [ 14 , 9 , 20 , 18 , 28 , 5], question phrasing [ 17 ], and relative prompt and chain-of-thought structure [ 22 ]. Most existing approaches focus on position and label biases, typically require model fine-tuning, access to logits or attention mechanisms, or multiple evaluation passes [ 9, 5, 39 , 18 , 28 , 20 ]. In contrast, our approach addresses multiple MCQ-induced biases in a single forward pass without fine-tuning or access to internal model states. Recent work has proposed abandoning the MCQ question format in favor of free-form answer gener-ation [ 3], including two-pass schemes that map generated answers back to options [ 7] or regenerate the MCQ label after the first reasoning pass [ 15 ]. However, such approaches are not universally applicable, as some questions lack unambiguous free-form answers and matching generated responses to candidate options can be NP-hard [7]. Nonetheless, MCQ evaluation offers its own distinct advantages, such as supporting constrained decision spaces [ 21 ] and “None of the above” distractors [ 10 , 30 ], motivating its continued relevance [ 37 ]. Building on this insight, we retain the MCQ formulation while requiring models to generate full answer text rather than selecting a label, which is then matched to candidate options. This hybrid approach reduces previously identified biases while preserving the practical benefits of MCQ benchmarks. 2Our work is inspired by previous research on free-form answer generation, which examines answer equivalence through semantic similarity to enhance evaluation metrics. [ 6, 25 ]. We build on their insights and adapt these ideas to create an improved MCQ evaluation standard. Similarly, while some of the biases used in this study have been explored in previous literature, with position and label biases extensively explored in [ 39 , 40 ], and some of the few-shot example majority and recency biases explored in [ 38 ], we differ from their models in our evaluation, as we do not require raw logits and explore a greater combination of biases [ 39 , 38 ], with [ 39 , 40 ] overlooking the few-shot bias. Additionally, while [ 15 ] explores null prompting, similar to our NonsenseQA, their approach relies on deliberately placing the correct answer in the least likely position, far from semantically similar distractors. In contrast, our method requires no prior knowledge of the correct answer and is applicable in standard evaluation settings. Moreover, we use NonsenseQA as a diagnostic tool to expose a broader range of biases in MCQ evaluation. 

3 Problem Formulation 

We formalize the MCQ evaluation setting to characterize the sources of bias that models may exploit. An MCQ dataset D consists of N instances, where each instance (qk, Ak, a ∗

> k

) for k ∈ { 1, . . . , N }

comprises a question qk, a set of n candidate answer options Ak = {a(1)  

> k

, . . . , a (n) 

> k

}, and a ground-truth answer a∗ 

> k

∈ A k.An evaluation protocol E = ( P, L, π, X ) transforms each MCQ instance into a prompt and extracts a prediction from the model. The protocol is defined by four components, each introducing potential bias: (i) Few-shot prompt : P = {(qj , Aj , a ∗ 

> j

)}mj=1 : a set of m exemplar questions with answers, whose answer distribution may be exploited; (ii) Option labels : L = ( ℓ1, . . . , ℓ n): an ordered tuple of symbols assigned to each answer position, which may carry implicit ordering cues; (iii) Permutation : π ∈ Sn: an element of the symmetric group determining the presentation order of answer options; (iv) Extraction function : X : Y → A k: a mapping from the space of model outputs Y to a candidate answer. Given a language model fθ : T → Y mapping input text T to output text Y, the predicted answer for question k under protocol E is: 

ˆak = X  fθ (PROMPT (qk, Ak, L, π, P)) , (1) where P ROMPT (·) constructs the full input according to the protocol specification. Using these definition, we can formulate the evaluation protocols: The standard evaluation – Select-and-Letter (S&L) – employs distinct labels, for instance with |A k| = 4 , L = ( A, B, C, D) and an extraction function X that identifies a single letter from the model output. Our proposed protocol – Matched-and-Dashed (M&D) – instead uses uniform labels L = ( -, -, -, -) and defines X as a semantic similarity matching operation between the model’s output and candidate answers Ak.

4 Matching answers - bias-reduced evaluation protocol 

Inspired by previous work [ 39 , 25 ], we propose a bias-reduced evaluation protocol for LLMs in the MCQ setting. Previous work investigated how various answer labels affect models’ accuracy and robustness [ 39 , 40 ]. All previous work focused on distinct-per-answer labels, without considering uniform labels. Nevertheless, the issue primarily stems from distinct per-answer labels, rather than the labels themselves. Therefore, we propose using standard dashes ”-” as labels to mimic an unordered list in a standard Markdown setting and remove any label bias introduced by the natural ordering of labels. However, without distinct labels, we cannot predict labels as our answers. If we default to predicting ordered labels (e.g., A/B/C/D), we introduce prediction bias. Therefore, to remove any label-dependent bias, we make the model choose the full-text option, as in [ 39 ]. We use a simple instruction and a set of regular expressions to extract the final, one-sentence answer from the LLM’s output. 3Figure 1: An example of the wrong conclusion reached by the Gemma-3-12 B-it model on one of the questions from the ARC [ 8] dataset with our proposed method. By changing the presentations from standard evaluation (with different labels and predicting only the answer label) to matched (with uniform labels and predicting a whole answer, shown on the left), we eliminate the label bias present, and the model arrives at a correct conclusion that aligns with its reasoning. While Zheng et al. [39] uses a cloze evaluation to extract the final answer, we use standard generation coupled with a sentence similarity model to produce embeddings for the extracted final answer and the possible MCQ options. This allows for variation in the model’s output, the use of synonyms, and chain-of-thought reasoning. As the final answer, we choose the option with the highest similarity to the extracted final answer from the LLM’s output. In standard MCQ benchmark evaluation protocols, a random answer option is selected as a fallback. Similarly, we also allow the final regular expression-based answer extraction to be more random by extracting the last sentence of the LLM’s output if the previous regular expressions fail. This serves as a better extraction method than standard ones, as some of the reasoning might align with the output. Nevertheless, we find that this extraction method is rarely used. Moreover, to enforce a full-sentence answer, we slightly modify the original prompt. We depict all the regular expressions used for answer extraction and the modified prompt in Appendix F.3. As for the sentence similarity model and the similarity function, we use the Qwen3-Embedding-0.6B [36 ] model with cosine similarity. Nevertheless, we find that the model and the similarity function choice do not influence the model’s performance significantly, as demonstrated in the Figure 7 in the Appendix D. A sentence similarity model addresses the shortcomings of a standard cloze evaluation in MCQ question answering, allowing chain-of-thought reasoning and similar answers to be accepted. (We provide a further discussion in Appendix B) 

5 Results 

5.1 Models, datasets, and parameters 

We evaluate 13 open-source LLMs ranging from 8B to 32B parameters, including model families like DeepSeek-R1 [ 12 ], Qwen3 [ 35 ], Llama-3.1 [ 11 ], Gemma-3 [ 31 ], Ministral-3 [ 16 ], Nemotron [ 32 , 4], Phi-4 [ 1], and GPT-OSS [ 2]. We use our synthetic NonsenseQA benchmark and five real-world benchmarks: CSQA [ 29 ], ARC [ 8 ], MMLU-Pro [ 34 ], GPQA [ 23 ], and a multilingual subset of INCLUDE [ 27 ]. For INCLUDE, we report results on four languages shared across all model training data: Spanish, French, Italian, and German. All detailed statistics are provided in the Appendix I in Tables Tables 6 to 10. 4For each model, we evaluate the original permutation and |A k| answer-moving attacks using a fixed seed and the model’s preferred generation parameters, as previous research has shown the temperature 

t ∈ [0 , 1] does not negatively impact model performance [ 24 ]; when unavailable, we use a standard configuration described in Appendix F. During each answer-moving attack, we vary the permutation 

π to alter the position of the ground-truth answer a∗ 

> k

within both the test question and the few-shot prompt P, except for the GPQA dataset, where we modify π only for test questions. Across all permutations, the identity of a∗ 

> k

remains unchanged; only its position varies. In our analysis, we evaluate performance metrics that include the original, dataset-provided option permutation accuracy (represented by dots on the plot) and accuracy under ”moving answer” attacks [ 39 ]. For each model, we present a box plot that summarizes the attack performance metrics, dis-playing the standard deviation and median with the box, and the minimum and maximum accuracy with the whiskers. This representation allows us to assess the robustness of the model’s performance. By comparing both the median accuracy of the attack permutations and the original permutation performance, we can quantify the difference between the standard and anomalous prompts. Addition-ally, to provide a comprehensive evaluation, we compute a SCORE [ 19 ] robustness metric across all permutations, including both original and attack scenarios. Let Π denote the set of permutations under which we evaluate, and let ˆYk = {ˆa(π) 

> k

: π ∈ Π} be the set of predictions for question k across all permutations. The SCORE is defined as: SCORE = 1

N

> N

X

> k=1

X 

> ˆai∈ˆYk

X  

> ˆaj∈ˆYk
> i̸=j

sim (ˆ ai, ˆaj )

 | ˆYk |

> 2

 (2) where N is the number of questions in the dataset D; ˆai and ˆaj are predictions for question k under different permutations; and sim (ˆ ai, ˆaj ) is a similarity function. Moreover, to measure the effects of our method on the stability of the model’s performance, we propose to estimate a variance ratio σ2

> R

defined as: 

σ2 

> R

= σ2 

> M&D

σ2

> S&L

, (3) where σ2 

> S&L

and σ2  

> M&D

is variance under S&L and M&D evaluation protocol, respectively. 

5.2 NonsenseQA 

Figure 2: An example question from NonsenseQA with random answers and a golden answer chosen at random as ”D. Arms”. Before evaluating our bias-robust evaluation pro-tocol on real benchmarks, we first introduce 

NonsenseQA a synthetic dataset that allows us to quantify the influence of various biases on a model’s output, motivating the design of our approach. NonsenseQA consists of 1,000 ran-dom questions, each with four answer options 

∀k , |A k| = 4 . Each question is formed using a selection of five to twenty random words, while each answer consists of one to six random words. To ensure the use of actual words, we utilize the ”Wordlist 10,000” for each component. Addi-tionally, we assign a pseudo-golden answer to each question in a way that maintains a uniform distribution of answers, ensuring that no bias is introduced in the original data, we provide an example in Figure 2. We create a smaller validation dataset of 100 questions, where each question can be used for the few-shot prompting when querying the NonsenseQA. We designed the benchmark to demonstrate various types of biases, as by design the accuracy on NonsenseQA should be close to the chance level of 25%. However, under the standard evaluation protocol, we observe a different behavior. The results are presented in Figure 3, with our proposed method of matching answers with uniform labels, labeled as ”M&D,” in comparison to the standard letter prediction and letter label methods, which are marked as ”S&L”. In the Appendix E, we examine each component’s influence on the accuracy of NonsenseQA, with additional statistics from 5Figure 3: Comparison of the matched prediction with dashes as labels (M&D; our method) with standard letter prediction with letters (A/B/C/D) as labels (S&L) on NonsenseQA with a 5-shot prompt. The boxes illustrate the model performance under all possibilities of ”answer-moving attacks”, where the whiskers indicate the minimum and maximum accuracy for each model. Each dot represents the performance of the original permutations. Additionally, each star symbolizes a SCORE [19] robustness metric. only matching but preserving the letters (M&L) and the standard letter prediction but using dashes as labels (S&D). We can observe three types of models when it comes to the few-shot and label bias under the S&L method (Section C). 1. Explicit bias models : use answers to the few-shot prompt questions to reason about the provided question. Within the model’s output, we see that the model directly references answers to other questions to answer the test question. An example model is the GPT-OSS [2]. 2. Implicit bias models : use answers to the few-shot prompt questions to reason about the provided answer. An example model could be the Qwen3-8B [ 35 ]. These models do not directly reason about other answers, but achieve a performance greater than 50% consistently, showing that there is bias when it comes to the distribution present in the few-shot prompt. 3. Models unable to exploit the bias : only marginally exploit the few-shot bias implicitly. These models, while still experiencing higher than usual performance with S&L, cannot utilize the bias consistently, achieving high performance only a few times with median scores at around 50%. An example model would be Gemma-3-27b-it [ 31 ]. However, none of the models achieve a mean lower than 40%. Under the proposed M&D protocol, median accuracy on NonsenseQA drops sharply, with several models approaching chance-level performance of 25%, indicating effective suppression of bias exploitation. By using uniform labels and full-text answer generation, the protocol blurs few-shot patterns and limits models reliance on them. While a subset of models still exhibits some biases, with median accuracy ∼ 50% , this remains substantially lower than the > 95% medians observed under standard evaluation. Across all models, median accuracy under S&L evaluation is significantly higher than under M&D. A paired Wilcoxon test confirms this difference (p-value < 10 −4; Cohen’s d = 2 .2), with per-model median reductions ranging from 12.5% (Ministral-3) to 52% (Nemotron-3-Nano), demonstrating that M&D reduces bias-driven performance gains. 65.3 Reasoning benchmarks: CSQA and ARC. 

To assess the impact of our evaluation protocol on simple reasoning benchmarks, we report results on CSQA [29] and ARC [8]. Figure 4 compares our M&D protocol to the standard S&L evaluation on CSQA. Across all 13 models, M&D consistently reduces the gap between original permutation accuracy and mean accuracy under answer-moving attacks. Moreover, except for Llama-3.1, our protocol yields substantially lower variance, indicating improved robustness to label and few-shot prompt biases. These results suggest that M&D mitigates reliance on few-shot answer distributions and label shortcuts, producing more stable performance estimates. Figure 17 presents analogous results on ARC. Despite the differences in the number of answers (5 vs. 4) and the domain (commonsense vs. grade-level science), the trends remain consistent – 11 of 13 models exhibit reduced accuracy variance across permutations, and the same number show a smaller gap between original and attacked accuracies under M&D protocol compared to S&L. This demonstrates that our evaluation protocol generalizes across reasoning MCQ benchmarks with diverse structural and topical properties. 

Figure 4: Comparison of the matched prediction with dashes as labels (M&D; our method) with standard letter prediction with letters as labels (S&L) on CSQA [ 29 ] with a 5-shot prompt. The boxes illustrate the model performance under all possibilities of ”answer-moving attacks”, where the whiskers indicate the minimum and maximum accuracy for each model. Each dot represents the performance of the original permutations. Additionally, each star symbolizes a SCORE [ 19 ]robustness metric. 

5.4 Across languages: INCLUDE. 

To evaluate whether MCQ-induced biases persist in non-English settings, we report results on the INCLUDE dataset using a subset of languages explicitly used during model training – Spanish, French, Italian, and German. The results are shown in Figure 20 and Table 10 in the Appendix I. We adopt the same evaluation protocol as in the English-only experiments, following [ 27 ], which uses a mixed-language setup with an English prompt, followed by questions and answer options in the original language, which was shown to improve performance across models. Consistent with English benchmarks, most models show reduced variance across permutations and a smaller gap between original and attack-averaged accuracy. This suggests that label and prediction-mode artifacts are not language-specific, but generalize across multilingual settings. 7Table 1: We report the variance ratio σ2 

> R

for each model, where σ2 

> R

< 1 indicates lower variance under the M&D evaluation protocol, whereas σ2 

> R

> 1 indicates lower variance under the S&L evaluation protocol. To summarize overall model-level trends, we compute the geometric mean of σ2

> R

across all datasets, denoted xGEOM (σ2

> R

). Across all datasets and models, we observe a geometric mean of variance ratio of 0.33 , demonstrating a 3× reduction in models’ accuracy variance under our protocol.                                                                                              

> Model name σ2
> RCSQA σ2
> RARC σ2
> RGP QA σ2
> RIN CLU DE σ2
> RM M LU −P RO xGEOM (σ2
> R)
> Deepseek-r1-0528-qwen3 0.005 0.089 0.226 0.033 0.945 0.08 Deepseek-r1-distill-qwen 0.038 0.135 0.184 0.118 0.041 0.09 Llama-3.1-8b-instruct 1.688 0.104 0.645 3.479 2.121 0.96 Ministral-3-8b-base 0.346 0.813 0.658 0.534 0.577 0.56 Nvidia-nemotron-3-nano 0.008 0.066 0.073 0.059 0.620 0.07 Nemotron-cascade-8b 0.105 0.351 1.540 0.154 1.610 0.43 Qwen3-14b 0.007 2.823 3.124 0.401 2.811 0.59 Qwen3-30b-a3b-instruct 0.664 1.082 1.486 0.306 3.080 1.00 Qwen3-8b 0.414 0.959 0.385 0.188 1.171 0.51 Gemma-3-12b-it 0.659 0.373 0.096 0.967 0.598 0.42 Gemma-3-27b-it 0.222 0.379 0.871 1.409 0.989 0.63 Gpt-oss-20b 0.057 0.068 1.743 0.007 3.933 0.18 Phi-4 0.396 0.748 0.203 0.307 0.763 0.43
> xGEOM (σ2
> R)0.11 0.33 0.49 0.23 0.99 0.33

5.5 Larger number of options: MMLU-Pro. 

While most benchmarks include only four to five answer options, we evaluate MMLU-Pro [ 34 ] to test the applicability of our method in settings with more closely aligned distractors. MMLU-Pro contains approximately 14,000 challenging questions across diverse academic domains, each with ten answer options. We report results in Figure 19 and Table 9 in the Appendix I, using the same evaluation protocol as for ARC and CSQA. Unlike other benchmarks, many models achieve their highest accuracy under the original permutation under both S&L and M&D evaluations, with even minor answer-position changes causing substantial performance drops. This indicates a strong reliance on positional biases, particularly among models that also exhibit explicit or implicit bias exploitation on NonsenseQA. Importantly, this behavior reflects structural properties of MMLU-Pro rather than a limitation of the proposed protocol. For models less dependent on such shortcuts, our method still reduces accuracy variance in 7 of 13 cases, demonstrating that it selectively exposes MCQ-specific brittleness without uniformly degrading robustness or performance. 

5.6 Difficult questions: GPQA. 

Finally, to show the applicability of our evaluation protocol to the most difficult answers, we extend the evaluation to the GPQA dataset. Unlike the previous benchmarks, for the GPQA dataset, we do not alter the few-shot answer distribution under answer-moving attacks. We decided to preserve the original prompt distribution to demonstrate that our method is still applicable, even when the few-shot prompt answers do not follow a malicious permutation. Consistent with previous findings, as shown in Figure 18 and Table 8 in Appendix I, our protocol reduces the variance between the accuracies in 9 out of 13 models. Furthermore, it reduces the gap between the original permutation accuracy and the mean answer-moving attack accuracy in 8 out of 13 models. 

5.7 SCORE alone overlooks evaluation biases. 

Across most benchmarks, models evaluated under the S&L protocol achieve higher SCORE values than under the M&D protocol. This behavior is expected: biases in the few-shot answer distributions enable models to produce highly consistent predictions by exploiting MCQ shortcuts. As a result, S&L evaluation can overstate model robustness by rewarding shortcut-driven consistency rather than stable reasoning. For example, two models that achieve identical SCORE may behave fundamentally differently. If one model exploits permutation bias for perfect accuracy in 10 out of 11 runs while completely failing on 8(a) Spearman cross-benchmark correlation difference between ρM &D − ρS&L. A pos-itive value indicates a higher M&D cross-benchmark correlation, while a negative -higher S&L correlation.         

> (b) Kendall tau cross-benchmark rank-agreement difference τM&D−τS&L. A pos-itive value indicates a higher M&D cross-benchmark rank agreement, while a negative - higher S&L rank agreement.

Figure 5: Cross-benchmark Spearman and Kendall Tau rank correlation agreement the original permutations, and the other predicts correctly with 90% probability across all runs, both would achieve a SCORE of 0.82. We therefore supplement the SCORE metric with the variance ratio metric defined in Eq. 3, which better separates these behaviors. In the example above, the variance ratio is ∼ 0.001 , a 900 ×

reduction, clearly distinguishing shortcut exploitation from genuine consistency. As reported in Table 1, across most models and benchmarks, M&D yields consistently lower variance, confirming that our protocol suppresses bias-driven prediction shortcuts. As for the SCORE metric alone, only two models, Ministral-3 [ 16 ] and Gemma-3 [ 31 ], achieve a higher SCORE on both the MMLU-Pro and the ARC benchmarks. In contrast, under GPQA, where few-shot distributions are not manipulated, 10 of 13 models show improved SCORE under M&D, clearly demonstrating that robustness gains stem from removing exploitable MCQ structure rather than few-shot artifacts alone. However, across all these datasets, we observe that majority of models achieve a variance ratio below one. We expand on the influence of biases on the SCORE metric in Appendix I.3. 

5.8 Cross-Benchmark Agreement 

To assess whether our protocol preserves meaningful benchmark relationships, we compute Spearman (ρ) and Kendall ( τ ) rank correlations between benchmark pairs under both M&D and S&L protocols, reporting the differences as e.g., ρM &D − ρS&L. We provide a formal definition of these statistics in Appendix J and demonstrate the Spearman and Kendall Tau differences in Figures 5a and 5b, respectively. As shown in Figure 5a, most cross-benchmark correlations remain stable across protocols. However, reasoning-focused pairs, GPQA–ARC and GPQA–CSQA, show increased agreement under M&D, suggesting that once evaluation biases are reduced, performance on challenging reasoning tasks aligns more closely with simpler benchmarks. This trend is reinforced by Figure 5b, which shows increased rank consistency between GPQA and ARC, CSQA, and MMLU-Pro under M&D. This is intuitive, as these benchmarks primarily assess reasoning and academic knowledge, with GPQA representing the most challenging setting. In contrast, INCLUDE shows decreased agreement with English benchmarks under M&D, revealing that strong English-language performance does not necessarily translate to comparable multilingual reasoning ability—a relationship previously masked by shared evaluation artifacts Finally, reduced CSQA–MMLU-Pro agreement under M&D suggests MMLU-Pro retains knowledge-driven questions requiring minimal reasoning from MMLU [ 34 ], leading to divergent rankings once biases are removed. Overall, these results show that the proposed protocol exposes meaningful structural differences between benchmarks that are masked under standard evaluation. 95.9 Ablation studies Sentence similarity model and function. We evaluated various sentence similarity models and functions and did not observe major differences, therefore we use a small model for efficiency (Appendix D.1). 

Option label symbols. We evaluated various combinations of option labels L both homogeneous and heterogeneous, indicating that homogeneous labeling improves evaluation stability over hetero-geneous labeling, and that symbols might carry prior semantic associations that can lead to increase variance. (Appendix D.2). 

6 Conclusion 

MCQ benchmarks are a standard tool for evaluating state-of-the-art LLMs, yet common evaluation protocols introduce artifacts that models can exploit without genuine reasoning. Beyond well-studied position and label biases, we demonstrate how the additional few-shot answer distribution and prediction-mode biases impact the evaluation. To diagnose these effects, we introduce NonsenseQA, a simple diagnostic benchmark that isolates model behavior under controlled changes to few-shot distributions, labeling schemes, and prediction modes. Guided by these findings, we propose a bias-reduced evaluation standard that preserves the MCQ structure while mitigating these artifacts. Across diverse models and benchmarks, our approach of using homogeneous labels, full-text answer generation, and semantic similarity-based matching yields more stable and informative evaluations than standard MCQ scoring. In particular, it improves cross-benchmark agreement and more clearly differentiates models by reasoning, simple knowledge retrieval, and multilingual capabilities. We hope this work encourages more careful treatment of evaluation artifacts and advances more robust assessment of LLMs. 

Broader societal impact statement 

The ubiquitous adoption of AI systems and large language models raises important concerns regarding biases and how models may exploit evaluation artifacts when answering questions. Let’s consider an example of a professional relying on an LLM to validate a high-stakes decision. When such a query is presented in a multiple-choice format with few-shot prompting, model outputs may be driven by label biases or patterns in the previous examples rather than by genuine reasoning, potentially leading to serious consequences. Our benchmark and evaluation protocol aim to expose these behaviors by influencing model choices and reducing performance variance attributable to evaluation artifacts, thereby isolating errors that stem from true gaps in model knowledge or reasoning. Widespread adoption of our proposed evalua-tion protocol and our NonsenseQA benchmark as a diagnostic tool could serve as a practical guiderail, enabling more consistent and reliable LLM evaluation with minimal additional computational cost, and helping practitioners identify models that rely least on few-shot and label-induced biases. 

Acknowledgment 

This research was funded by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), under contract W912CG23C0031. 10 References 

[1] Marah Abdin, Jyoti Aneja, Harkirat Behl, S ´ebastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Suriya Gunasekar, Michael Harrison, Russell J Hewett, Mojan Javaheripi, Piero Kauffmann, et al. Phi-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.08905 , 2024. [2] Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Jason Ai, Sam Altman, Andy Applebaum, Edwin Arbus, Rahul K Arora, Yu Bai, Bowen Baker, Haiming Bao, et al. gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b model card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10925 , 2025. [3] Nishant Balepur, Rachel Rudinger, and Jordan Lee Boyd-Graber. Which of these best describes multiple choice evaluation with llms? a) forced b) flawed c) fixable d) all of the above. CoRR ,abs/2502.14127, February 2025. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2502.14127 .[4] Aaron Blakeman, Aaron Grattafiori, Aarti Basant, Abhibha Gupta, Abhinav Khattar, Adi Renduchintala, Aditya Vavre, Akanksha Shukla, Akhiad Bercovich, Aleksander Ficek, et al. Nemotron 3 nano: Open, efficient mixture-of-experts hybrid mamba-transformer model for agentic reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.20848 , 2025. [5] Katrina Brown and Reid McIlroy-Young. Order independence with finetuning. In ICLR 2025 Workshop on Bidirectional Human-AI Alignment , 2025. [6] Jannis Bulian, Christian Buck, Wojciech Gajewski, Benjamin B ¨orschinger, and Tal Schuster. Tomayto, tomahto. beyond token-level answer equivalence for question answering evaluation. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 291–305, 2022. [7] Nikhil Chandak, Shashwat Goel, Ameya Prabhu, Moritz Hardt, and Jonas Geiping. An-swer matching outperforms multiple choice for language model evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02856 , 2025. [8] Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05457 , 2018. [9] Beni Egressy and Jan St ¨uhmer. Set-LLM: A permutation-invariant LLM. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=Eyis2h3tba .[10] Ahmed Elhady, Eneko Agirre, and Mikel Artetxe. WiCkeD: A simple method to make multiple choice benchmarks more challenging. In Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar, editors, Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 1183–1192, Vienna, Austria, July 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-252-7. doi: 10. 18653/v1/2025.acl-short.94. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.acl-short.94/ .[11] Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 , 2024. [12] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 , 2025. [13] Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. [14] Wonjun Jeong, Dongseok Kim, and Taegkeun Whangbo. Scope: Stochastic and counterbiased option placement for evaluating large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.18182 , 2025. [15] Hwiyeol Jo, Joosung Lee, Jaehone Lee, Sang-Woo Lee, Joonsuk Park, and Kang Min Yoo. Finding answers in thought matters: Revisiting evaluation on large language models with reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.14773 , 2025. 11 [16] Alexander H Liu, Kartik Khandelwal, Sandeep Subramanian, Victor Jouault, Abhinav Rastogi, Adrien Sad ´e, Alan Jeffares, Albert Jiang, Alexandre Cahill, Alexandre Gavaudan, et al. Ministral 3. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.08584 , 2026. [17] Riccardo Lunardi, Vincenzo Della Mea, Stefano Mizzaro, and Kevin Roitero. On robustness and reliability of benchmark-based evaluation of llms. In ECAI 2025 , pages 4603–4610. IOS Press, 2025. [18] Reid McIlroy-Young, Katrina Brown, Conlan Olson, Linjun Zhang, and Cynthia Dwork. Order-independence without fine tuning. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=lQ45aR8L7D .[19] Grigor Nalbandyan, Rima Shahbazyan, and Evelina Bakhturina. SCORE: Systematic COnsis-tency and robustness evaluation for large language models. In Weizhu Chen, Yi Yang, Moham-mad Kachuee, and Xue-Yong Fu, editors, Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 3: Industry Track) , pages 470–484, Albuquerque, New Mexico, April 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-194-0. doi: 10.18653/v1/ 2025.naacl-industry.39. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.naacl-industry.39/ .[20] Pouya Pezeshkpour and Estevam Hruschka. Large language models sensitivity to the order of options in multiple-choice questions. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024 , pages 2006–2017, 2024. [21] Hossein A. Rahmani, Satyapriya Krishna, Xi Wang, Mohammadmehdi Naghiaei, and Emine Yilmaz. Self-correcting large language models: Generation vs. multiple choice, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.09381 .[22] Narun Krishnamurthi Raman, Taylor Lundy, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Reasoning models are test exploiters: Rethinking multiple choice. In AAAI 2026 Workshop on Assessing and Improving Reliability of Foundation Models in the Real World , 2026. [23] David Rein, Betty Li Hou, Asa Cooper Stickland, Jackson Petty, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Julien Dirani, Julian Michael, and Samuel R. Bowman. GPQA: A graduate-level google-proof q&a benchmark. In First Conference on Language Modeling , 2024. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=Ti67584b98 .[24] Matthew Renze. The effect of sampling temperature on problem solving in large language models. In Findings of the association for computational linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 7346–7356, 2024. [25] Julian Risch, Timo M ¨oller, Julian Gutsch, and Malte Pietsch. Semantic answer similarity for evaluating question answering models. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Machine Reading for Question Answering , pages 149–157, 2021. [26] Joshua Robinson and David Wingate. Leveraging large language models for multiple choice question answering. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations ,2023. [27] Angelika Romanou, Negar Foroutan, Anna Sotnikova, Sree Harsha Nelaturu, Shivalika Singh, Rishabh Maheshwary, Micol Altomare, Zeming Chen, Mohamed A Haggag, Alfonso Amayue-las, et al. Include: Evaluating multilingual language understanding with regional knowledge. In 

The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [28] Isik Baran Sandan, Tu Anh Dinh, and Jan Niehues. Knockout LLM assessment: Using large language models for evaluations through iterative pairwise comparisons. In Ofir Arviv, Miruna Clinciu, Kaustubh Dhole, Rotem Dror, Sebastian Gehrmann, Eliya Habba, Itay Itzhak, Simon Mille, Yotam Perlitz, Enrico Santus, Jo ˜ao Sedoc, Michal Shmueli Scheuer, Gabriel Stanovsky, and Oyvind Tafjord, editors, Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Generation, Evaluation and Metrics (GEM²) , pages 121–128, Vienna, Austria and virtual meeting, July 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-261-9. URL https: //aclanthology.org/2025.gem-1.10/ .12 [29] Alon Talmor, Jonathan Herzig, Nicholas Lourie, and Jonathan Berant. CommonsenseQA: A question answering challenge targeting commonsense knowledge. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and Thamar Solorio, editors, Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 4149–4158, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1421. URL https:// aclanthology.org/N19-1421/ .[30] Zhi Rui Tam, Cheng-Kuang Wu, Chieh-Yen Lin, and Yun-Nung Chen. None of the above, less of the right parallel patterns in human and LLM performance on multi-choice questions answering. In Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar, editors, 

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 20112–20134, Vienna, Austria, July 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-256-5. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.findings-acl.1031. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025. findings-acl.1031/ .[31] Gemma Team, Aishwarya Kamath, Johan Ferret, Shreya Pathak, Nino Vieillard, Ramona Merhej, Sarah Perrin, Tatiana Matejovicova, Alexandre Ram ´e, Morgane Rivi `ere, et al. Gemma 3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19786 , 2025. [32] Boxin Wang, Chankyu Lee, Nayeon Lee, Sheng-Chieh Lin, Wenliang Dai, Yang Chen, Yangyi Chen, Zhuolin Yang, Zihan Liu, Mohammad Shoeybi, et al. Nemotron-cascade: Scal-ing cascaded reinforcement learning for general-purpose reasoning models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.13607 , 2025. [33] Xinpeng Wang, Chengzhi Hu, Bolei Ma, Paul Rottger, and Barbara Plank. Look at the text: Instruction-tuned language models are more robust multiple choice selectors than you think. In First Conference on Language Modeling , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum? id=qHdSA85GyZ .[34] Yubo Wang, Xueguang Ma, Ge Zhang, Yuansheng Ni, Abhranil Chandra, Shiguang Guo, Weiming Ren, Aaran Arulraj, Xuan He, Ziyan Jiang, et al. Mmlu-pro: A more robust and challenging multi-task language understanding benchmark. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:95266–95290, 2024. [35] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025. [36] Yanzhao Zhang, Mingxin Li, Dingkun Long, Xin Zhang, Huan Lin, Baosong Yang, Pengjun Xie, An Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Junyang Lin, et al. Qwen3 embedding: Advancing text embedding and reranking through foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05176 , 2025. [37] Yue Zhang and Nhan Nguyen. Rethinking MCQ benchmarks: Mandatory reasoning evaluation reveals significant performance drops in large language models. In NeurIPS 2025 Workshop on Evaluating the Evolving LLM Lifecycle: Benchmarks, Emergent Abilities, and Scaling , 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=U0WNteGf73 .[38] Zihao Zhao, Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Dan Klein, and Sameer Singh. Calibrate before use: Improving few-shot performance of language models. In International conference on machine learning , pages 12697–12706. PMLR, 2021. [39] Chujie Zheng, Hao Zhou, Fandong Meng, Jie Zhou, and Minlie Huang. Large language models are not robust multiple choice selectors. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=shr9PXz7T0 .[40] Wenjie Zhou, Qiang Wang, Mingzhou Xu, Ming Chen, and Xiangyu Duan. Revisiting the self-consistency challenges in multi-choice question formats for large language model evaluation. In Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024) , pages 14103–14110, 2024. 13 A Selected datasets 14 B On the advantages of sentence similarity over cloze evaluation. 15 C The different types of models based on few-shot and label biases 15 D Ablation study 15 

D.1 The choice of sentence similarity model and function has limited impact. . . . . . . . . . . . 15 D.2 Impact of the symbols used and the non-uniformity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 

E NonsenseQA - Bias Decomposition 16 

E.1 Standard & Letter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 E.2 Standard & Dash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 E.3 Matched & Letter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 E.4 Matched & Dash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 E.5 Full comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 

F Evaluation details 20 

F.1 Computational cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 F.2 Regular expression used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 F.3 Default parameters and prompt modification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 F.4 Prompt example - Matched . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 

G Code and benchmark release 22 H Limitations 22 I Detailed results 23 

I.1 NonsenseQA - detailed results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 I.2 Real benchmark - detailed results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 I.3 On the SCORE paradox - capturing bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 

J Cross-Benchmark Agreement - Kendall Tau and Spearman differences 24 

A Selected datasets 

The evaluation of large language models relies on a diverse set of benchmarks designed to probe different reason-ing capabilities. In the domain of question answering grounded in common prior knowledge, CommonsenseQA [29 ] (CSQA) assesses whether models can reason about simple, everyday scenarios. The AI2 Reasoning Challenge [ 8] (ARC) targets deeper logical reasoning, going beyond surface-level pattern matching and factual recall to require scientific reasoning. To further reduce the likelihood of correct answers by chance and to emphasize deliberate, multi-domain reasoning at the college level, MMLU-Pro [ 34 ] extends the original MMLU [13 ] benchmark by filtering out knowledge-heavy questions with minimal reasoning requirements and increasing the number of distractors per question. Finally, GPQA [ 23 ] is designed to test advanced reasoning by introducing PhD-level, Google-proof questions. Despite these increasing levels of difficulty and expanded answer sets, we demonstrate that all of these benchmarks remain susceptible to shortcut exploitation by LLMs, indicating that high performance does not necessarily reflect genuine reasoning. Finally, to test the transferability of these biases to other languages, we test our evaluation protocol on the INCLUDE [ 27 ] dataset, a comprehensive knowledge-and reasoning-centric benchmark, which includes questions in 44 languages and focuses on MCQ questions extracted from academic and professional exams, covering 57 topics, including regional knowledge. By applying our proposed evaluation protocol, we mitigate these artifacts and substantially improve the robustness of these 

14 benchmarks, without any modifications to any of the benchmarks themselves, allowing a more faithful evaluation of the model’s reasoning abilities. 

B On the advantages of sentence similarity over cloze evaluation. 

A sentence similarity model addresses the shortcomings of a standard cloze evaluation in MCQ question answering. The sentence similarity produces an embedding of a fixed size and allows for chain-of-thought reasoning and for semantically similar answers to be accepted. On the other hand, cloze-style evaluation needs to normalize the predicted score by the token length of the possible answer and can only evaluate the logits for the tokens predicted right after the prompt. Moreover, cloze-style evaluation does not compute logits for semantically similar answers. 

C The different types of models based on few-shot and label biases 

We provide examples of models falling under the three models types identified in Section 5.2. (Type 1) Explicit bias models: use answers to the few-shot prompt questions to reason about the provided question: GPT-OSS. (Type 2) Implicit bias models: use answers to the few-shot prompt questions to reason about the provided answer, illustrated by Qwen3-8B. (Type 3) Models unable to exploit the bias: only marginally exploit the few-shot bias implicitly, illustrated by Gemma-3-27b-it. 

Figure 6: We identify three categories of models: those that explicitly exploit biases present in the few-shot prompt (e.g., GPT-OSS [ 2]), those that implicitly rely on such biases (e.g., Qwen3-8B [ 35 ]), and those that fail to reliably leverage few-shot prompt bias (e.g., Gemma-3-27b [ 31 ]). For each category, we provide representative examples and report their performance across all benchmarks. Model categorization is determined using performance on NonsenseQA, shown in the last column, where the expected performance should be close to chance-level (25%). 

D Ablation study 

We varied the sentence similarity model and function to evaluate their impact Section D.1, and considered different types of symbols and the effect of symbol heterogeneity and homogeneity Section D.2. 

D.1 The choice of sentence similarity model and function has limited impact. 

To motivate the design choices of our evaluation protocol, we ablate the effect of both the sentence similarity model and the similarity function on the CommonsenseQA benchmark, with the results demonstrated in Figure 7. We compare our approach against two baselines: the cloze-style evaluation [ 26 , 39 ] and the standard letter-based MCQ evaluation. The “Original” configuration corresponds to the one proposed in the main body of the paper, using the Qwen3-Embedding-0.6B model with cosine similarity. 

15 Across all ablations, we observe that variations in similarity model size, architecture, prompt formulation, and similarity function lead to only minor changes in evaluation behavior. In particular, the stability of model performance under answer-moving attacks remains largely unaffected by these design choices. However, all ablated variants consistently exhibit greater robustness to answer-position perturbations than both the cloze-style and standard MCQ evaluations. These results indicate that the robustness gains arise primarily from the proposed evaluation protocol itself, rather than from specific choices of similarity model or similarity metric. 

Figure 7: Ablation study on the effect of the similarity model and the similarity function. For the ablation study, we compare standard cloze-style evaluation (”Cloze”) with the letter prediction and matching (”Letter (standard)”) to various full-sentence prediction outputs. We compare the original setting of the Qwen3-Embedding-0.6B [ 36 ] model tested under varying conditions (”Original” experiments) with different model types and sizes. 

D.2 Impact of the symbols used and the non-uniformity 

Similarly, we perform an ablation study on the choice of option labels used in the Matched evaluation protocol, as shown in Figure 8. As before, we compare our approach against the cloze-style evaluation and the standard letter-based MCQ evaluation. We consider three homogeneous label sets and three heterogeneous label sets. For homogeneous configurations, we use the same label for all options, using either ” ”, a dash, or the symbol “X”. For heterogeneous configurations, we use distinct labels for each option, using either ( / / / / ), (1/2/3/4/5), or (A/B/C/D/E). Across these settings, we observe that homogeneous labeling improves evaluation stability relative to heterogeneous labeling. In particular, the emoji and dash labels exhibit comparable robustness. However, the “X” symbol leads to noticeably greater variance. This behavior could indicate that labels carrying prior semantic associations, such as “X,” which is commonly used to denote incorrect answers or unknowns, can introduce unintended biases into the evaluation. Overall, these results indicate that minimizing unintended semantic content in option labels is beneficial for reducing variance and improving robustness in MCQ-based evaluations. 

E NonsenseQA - Bias Decomposition 

To measure the difference between S&L and our proposed M&D, we evaluate all the possible combinations (S&L, S&D, M&L, and M&D) on NonsenseQA, and we show that our uniform label and matched full-text option prediction give the biggest randomness. In Figures 9 to 12, we demonstrate that the mode of prediction (S vs. M) has a bigger impact on the bias than the label used (D vs. L). Nevertheless, we find both design choices synergistic, achieving the least biased predictor - M&D. To simplify all the comparisons, we gather all plots in Figure 13. 

16 Figure 8: Ablation study on the effect of different labels used in the proposed matching protocol. For the ablation study, we compare standard letter prediction and matching (”Baseline”) to various label settings for the matching model. We compare using homogeneous per-option labels ( like dash (”Matched-dash”), a ” ” (”Matched-emoji”), and ”X” (”Matched-x”) ) to using heterogeneous labels (e.g, ( / / / / ) (”Different-emoji”), (A/B/C/D/E), and (1/2/3/4/5) ). 

E.1 Standard & Letter 

> As demonstrated in Figure 9, none of the models achieve an accuracy of 25% in all their runs, with some models consistently achieving an accuracy of 95% and a tight model variance spread. As for the original, random permutation on NonsenseQA, all models achieve an accuracy of around 25%. This demonstrated that, within our evaluation setup, models can freely exploit the few-shot prompt and label bias.

Figure 9: The performance of Standard-And-Letter (S&L) on our NonsenseQA dataset with a 5-shot prompt. The boxes illustrate the model performance under all possibilities of ”answer-moving attacks”, where the whiskers indicate the minimum and maximum accuracy for each model. Each dot represents the performance of the original permutations. Additionally, each star symbolizes a SCORE [19] robustness metric. 17 E.2 Standard & Dash 

Compared to the S&L evaluation protocol shown in Figure 9, S&D exhibits a noticeable reduction in bias, as shown in Figure 10. Although several models still achieve relatively high mean accuracy, some permutations approach chance-level performance of 25%, and a subset of models exhibits an overall lower mean accuracy. This suggests that removing distinct option labels mitigates a portion of the evaluation artifacts. However, the remaining performance inflation indicates that biases induced by the prediction mode and few-shot an-swer distribution are more influential than label-specific biases alone. In particular, models like Qwen3-14B and GPT-OSS-20B continue to achieve consistently high mean accuracy under S&D, highlighting that label homogenization is insufficient to suppress few-shot shortcut exploitation. 

Figure 10: The performance of Standard-And-Dash (S&D) on our NonsenseQA dataset with a 5-shot prompt. The boxes illustrate the model performance under all possibilities of ”answer-moving attacks”, where the whiskers indicate the minimum and maximum accuracy for each model. Each dot represents the performance of the original permutations. Additionally, each star symbolizes a SCORE [19] robustness metric. 

E.3 Matched & Letter 

To isolate the effect of prediction mode while preserving letter-based option labels, we evaluate model perfor-mance on NonsenseQA under the M&L protocol and report accuracy under answer-moving attacks in Figure 11. Relative to the S&L results shown in Figure 9, M&L yields a substantial reduction in mean under-attack accuracy, indicating that models are less able to exploit answer distributions present in the few-shot prompt when required to generate full-text answers. Notably, six of the thirteen evaluated models achieve a mean accuracy close to the chance level, reflecting effectively random behavior on random inputs. However, several models (e.g, Nemotron-Cascade-8B and GPT-OSS-20B) never approach chance-level accuracy across any of their permutations, suggesting that some biases persist even when prediction-mode shortcuts are partially mitigated. 

E.4 Matched & Dash 

Finally, we demonstrate the performance of our method, M&D, on NonsenseQA in Figure 12. Compared to the previous design choices presented in Figures 9 to 11, we observe that a full-text prediction mode with homogenous option labels leads to the most chance-like performance, with eight models achieving a mean under-attack accuracy of 25%. Moreover, we observe an increase in the number of models achieving an accuracy of 25% within one of their permutations, with 11 out of 13 models falling into that category. Nevertheless, two models - Llama 3.1 and GP-OSS-20B - still achieve a mean performance high above 25% with none of the permutations reaching a chance-like score. This demonstrates that some biases are still present within these models; however, under all measured evaluation protocols, M&D achieves the lowest mean under-attack accuracy for these models as well. 

18 Figure 11: The performance of Matched-And-Letter (M&L) on our NonsenseQA dataset with a 5-shot prompt. The boxes illustrate the model performance under all possibilities of ”answer-moving attacks”, where the whiskers indicate the minimum and maximum accuracy for each model. Each dot represents the performance of the original permutations. Additionally, each star symbolizes a SCORE [19] robustness metric. 

Figure 12: The performance of Matched-And-Dash (M&D) on our NonsenseQA dataset with a 5-shot prompt. The boxes illustrate the model performance under all possibilities of ”answer-moving attacks”, where the whiskers indicate the minimum and maximum accuracy for each model. Each dot represents the performance of the original permutations. Additionally, each star symbolizes a SCORE [19] robustness metric. 

E.5 Full comparison 

> To enable direct comparison across evaluation protocols on NonsenseQA, we consolidate all previously reported results in Figure 13. For each protocol, we use consistent color coding across figures to aid visual comparison. As demonstrated, the S&L and M&D protocols exhibit the highest and lowest levels of bias, respectively. Under S&L, none of the evaluated models approach chance-level performance, whereas under M&D, the majority of models exhibit near-random accuracy. This contrast indicates that evaluation artifacts arise jointly from the

19 prediction mode and the option-label presentation. Together, these findings motivate the design of our protocol, which suppresses both sources of bias. 

Figure 13: The performance comparison under all the possible evaluation protocols (S&L, S&D, M&L, and M&D) on our NonsenseQA dataset with a 5-shot prompt. The boxes illustrate the model performance under all possibilities of ”answer-moving attacks”, where the whiskers indicate the minimum and maximum accuracy for each model. Each dot represents the performance of the original permutations. Additionally, each star symbolizes a SCORE [ 19 ] robustness metric. Each color is consistent with the previous Figures 9 to 12. 

F Evaluation details 

F.1 Computational cost 

In this subsection, we assess the practical overhead of the proposed evaluation protocol. Table 2 compares the empirical computational cost of evaluating CommonsenseQA with the Gemma-3-12b-it model under the S&L and M&D protocols. Overall, the total evaluation time under M&D is comparable to that of the standard S&L protocol. Notably, M&D exhibits a slightly lower mean generation time than S&L. One possible explanation is that the required reasoning output under M&D is simpler, as the model does not encode its final decision into an explicit MCQ label. The additional answer extraction step introduced by M&D is inexpensive, as the similarity-based extraction with a sentence similarity model on the entire CommonsenseQA dataset takes less than three seconds, accounting for approximately 7% of the total evaluation time under M&D. As the generation time under M&D is marginally shorter than under S&L, the net increase in overall computation time is limited to approximately 3%, as reported in the “Ratio” column of Table 2. 

Table 2: The computational cost of answer generation and extraction for the Gemma-3-12b-it model on CommonsenseQA under the S&L and M&D evaluation protocols across all six answer permuta-tions. For each setting, we report the average runtime in seconds, together with the corresponding standard deviation. The results show that the additional extraction step required by M&D accounts for only a small fraction of the total runtime, indicating that the proposed protocol introduces minimal computational overhead and remains practical for large-scale evaluation.                   

> S&L M&D Generation (s) Extraction (s) Total (s) Extraction cost (%) Generation (s) Extraction (s) Total (s) Extraction cost (%) Ratio Gemma-3-12b-it 36 .31( ±1.47) -36 .31( ±1.47) -34 .65( ±1.42) 2.70( ±0.04) 37 .35( ±1.43) 7% 1.03

20 F.2 Regular expression used 

In this section, we demonstrate the types of regular expressions used to extract the model, showing the usage frequency of each extraction regular expression on MMLU-Pro for all models in Table 3. For each regular expression, we extract the last occurrence of that expression within the output if there is a match. All of our regular expressions are based on similar counterparts within the standard evaluation protocol used for MMLU-Pro [34]. Below, we show the exact regular expressions used in the order of testing: • Expression #1 : answer is (?!.*answer is ).+ 

The first regular expression mirrors the one used in the MMLU-Pro evaluation code (answer is \(?([A-J])\)? ), which searches for an explicitly instructed answer match within the model output. In practice, the majority of extractions are resolved at this stage. • Expression #2 : .*[aA]nswer:\s*(?!.*[aA]nswer:\s*).+ 

The second regular expression is similarly adapted from MMLU-Pro ( .*[aA]nswer:\s*([A-J]) )and permits minor deviations in the answer prefix, increasing robustness to formatting variation. • Expression #3 : A regular expression verbosely searching each answer within the model’s output as is. Following the MMLU-Pro approach, which allows random A–J characters to be selected when earlier extraction attempts fail ( \b[A-J]\b(?!.*\b[A-J]\b) ), we instead allow the full, verbose answer to be captured if the first two extraction steps are unsuccessful. • Expression #4 : ([^.!?]+[.!?]*$) 

As a final fallback, we extract the last sentence of the model’s output. While this step serves a role analogous to MMLU-Pro’s random-choice fallback, we hypothesize that using the last generated sentence preserves semantically relevant information that can more informatively guide the similarity-based matching process. We observe that the majority of models satisfy Extraction Rule #1 in over 95% of generated outputs. The two notable exceptions are the two DeepSeek models, which achieve extraction success rates of approximately 70–80%. Manual inspection reveals that these failures are primarily due to formatting issues, such as the absence of whitespace in the generated answers, which complicates reliable extraction. If the model does not produce an answer, we choose a random answer. However, this has only occurred once in all of the permutations over all of the models on MMLU-Pro, as demonstrated in Table 3. 

Table 3: Extraction frequency of each proposed regular expression on MMLU-Pro [ 34 ] across models and all permutations evaluated. We observe that, for most models, approximately 98% of outputs adhere to the intended answer format and are successfully extracted by the primary matching rules, indicating that models generally follow the instructed output format reliably.                                                                       

> Frequency, % Model Name Extraction #1 Extraction #2 Extraction #3 Extraction #4 Failed
> DeepSeek-R1-0528-Qwen3-8B 72.75 1.92 8.24 17.09 0.00 DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B 83.75 2.73 3.74 9.78 0.00 Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct 95.81 0.00 0.88 3.30 0.00 Ministral-3-8B-Base-2512 97.34 0.04 1.26 1.36 0.00 NVIDIA-Nemotron-3-Nano-30B-A3B-BF16 95.99 0.70 2.08 1.23 0.00 Nemotron-Cascade-8B 99.75 0.00 0.12 0.12 0.00 Qwen3-14B 98.57 0.07 0.51 0.86 0.00 Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507 95.62 0.01 2.59 1.78 0.00 Qwen3-8B 98.56 0.00 0.67 0.76 0.00 gemma-3-12b-it 99.62 0.01 0.12 0.25 0.00 gemma-3-27b-it 98.69 0.00 0.45 0.86 0.01 gpt-oss-20b 91.82 3.42 1.12 3.64 0.00 phi-4 99.12 0.11 0.31 0.46 0.00

F.3 Default parameters and prompt modification 

When generating results, we use models’ preferred generation parameters provided on Huggingface, as it has been proven that they do not yield significant differences in MCQ answering. However, if no generation configuration is provided, we use the set of default parameters shown in Table 4 below. To enforce a full-text model generation and adherence to the option provided, we modify the generation instruction slightly, as shown in Figure 14. We find that by substituting “$X” with “$OPTION”, the model is less likely to answer using a letter, while the additional sentences improve the model output and further remove the letters used. 

21 Table 4: Default set of parameters used when the generation configuration is not provided on Huggingface. 

Parameter Temperature Top K Top P Min P Value 0.6 20 0.95 0

Figure 14: The proposed prompt modification with all changes in red. We find that by changing ”$X” to ”$OPTION” and adding the additional constraint forces the model to switch from letter prediction to full-text option prediction without mentioning any letters in their answers. 

F.4 Prompt example - Matched 

We provide an example few-shot question prompt under M&D protocol used for the ARC-Easy [ 8] benchmark evaluation in Figure 15. 

G Code and benchmark release 

For the code release, we provide the evaluation code used to run CommonsenseQA [ 29 ] under both the S&L and M&D protocols, demonstrating how easily existing benchmarks can be adapted to our evaluation framework. For NonsenseQA, we do not release a fixed benchmark instance. Instead, we provide lightweight code for generating the dataset. Releasing a static version of NonsenseQA would undermine its purpose as a diagnostic tool, as models could be explicitly trained on it to conceal underlying biases rather than expose them. 

H Limitations 

While we propose a bias-reduced evaluation protocol, our work has several limitations. • Position bias : Firstly, we do not attempt to mitigate position bias. Our moving-answer attack explicitly demonstrates the existence and impact of positional sensitivity, but the proposed protocol is designed to expose this bias, rather than correct it. In most benchmarks, position bias has a limited effect on model performance, as observed in the main body of the paper. However, in MMLU-Pro [ 34 ], the original answer position appears to influence evaluation significantly. This effect is clearly illustrated in Figure 19. Moreover, this could be the bias that prevents some models in NonsenseQA experiments from achieving 25% mean accuracy, as demonstrated in Figure 3. Nevertheless, our evaluation protocol is orthogonal to some of the position bias reduction solutions and can be combined with them. Developing methods to mitigate position bias without additional training or access to model logits, consistent with our work, remains an open direction for future research. • Generation vs. selection : Secondly, we do not directly quantify the gap between answer generation and answer selection. This would more explicitly characterize the difference between MCQ-induced bias and natural LLM reasoning. A fair comparison would require transforming existing benchmarks to support free-form answer generation while preserving their original semantics, including the removal or redesign of questions that inherently rely on multiple-choice structure (e.g., “Which of the following is the smallest?”). Constructing such datasets is beyond the scope of this paper, and we encourage future work to develop benchmarks that jointly support MCQ-based and generative evaluation. • English bias : Finally, although we use the INCLUDE [ 27 ] benchmark’s questions and answers in their original languages, we retain English-only instructions rather than using the original language-specific prompts. To rigorously evaluate the English language-induced biases, it would require designing 

22 additional language-specific answer extraction rules for the multilingual settings. While feasible, this would require linguistic expertise. We therefore leave a systematic study of instruction language and answer extraction effects in multilingual evaluation as an avenue for future work. 

I Detailed results 

In Tables 5 to 10, we report detailed per-benchmark results under both the S&L and M&D evaluation protocols. Table 5 presents results on the NonsenseQA benchmark, while the remaining tables correspond to real-world benchmarks. For each protocol and model, we report the mean accuracy under attack ( ACC M ean ), the original permutation accuracy ( ACC ORG ), the absolute difference between original and attacked performance (|∆ACC |), the variance across all permutations ( σ2), the minimum and maximum accuracies ( ACC min and 

ACC max , respecitvely), the resulting accuracy range ( ∆max −min ), and the SCORE metric ( SCORE ). In addition, for each model, we compute • the variance ratio, defined as: 

σ2

R = σ2

M &D

σ2

S&L

, (4) • the difference in the SCORE metric, defined as: 

∆SCORE = SCORE M &D − SCORE S&L. (5) A variance ratio below one indicates reduced variance under the M&D protocol, while a negative SCORE difference indicates improved SCORE relative to S&L. The improvements in the significant results are highlighted in bold to facilitate visual comparison across models and protocols. We use the SCORE difference as a diagnostic tool, showing which models achieve higher reasoning consistency under M&D protocol (negative score) and which models achieve higher consistency under S&L protocol (positive score). The improvements in the significant results are highlighted in bold to facilitate visual comparison across models and protocols. 

I.1 NonsenseQA - detailed results 

For the NonsenseQA results reported in Table 5, we focus on two key statistics - the mean accuracy under attack and the SCORE difference. Given the synthetic nature of the dataset, we emphasize results in which the mean accuracy is closer to the chance level of 25%, as well as with models achieving negative SCORE differences, which indicate models that behave more randomly while exhibiting higher consistency under the M&D protocol. 

Table 5: Detailed results on NonsenseQA .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

> S&L M&D Model name ACC M ean ACC ORG |∆ACC |σ2ACC min ACC max ∆max −min SCORE ACC M ean ACC ORG |∆ACC |σ2ACC min ACC max ∆max −min SCORE σ2
> Ratio ∆SCORE
> Deepseek-r1-0528-qwen3 72.80 76.00 4.27 15.74 66.20 76.00 9.80 0.39 28.82 30.00 1.57 9.01 25.80 33.20 7.40 0.59 0.57 -0.195
> Deepseek-r1-distill-qwen 69.17 75.30 8.17 53.22 57.00 75.30 18.30 0.42 27.28 27.20 0.10 1.82 26.10 29.50 3.40 0.58 0.03 -0.154
> Llama-3.1-8b-instruct 53.88 56.10 2.97 58.26 46.40 65.40 19.00 0.38 38.38 53.10 19.63 74.07 31.30 53.10 21.80 0.43 1.27 -0.052
> Ministral-3-8b-base 40.27 42.90 3.50 49.58 30.10 49.50 19.40 0.34 30.40 40.40 13.33 36.80 24.70 40.40 15.70 0.44 0.74 -0.106
> Nvidia-nemotron-3-nano 89.12 96.40 9.70 26.41 83.80 96.40 12.60 0.58 37.08 56.90 26.43 149.54 23.60 56.90 33.30 0.53 5.66 0.050 Nemotron-cascade-8b 95.22 99.40 5.57 6.54 92.90 99.40 6.50 0.67 49.00 58.30 12.40 201.01 28.60 65.50 36.90 0.44 30.73 0.226 Qwen3-14b 81.12 91.20 13.43 48.70 72.80 91.20 18.40 0.57 35.93 55.00 25.43 134.67 23.80 55.00 31.20 0.50 2.77 0.070 Qwen3-30b-a3b-instruct 54.05 81.60 36.73 411.69 32.00 81.60 49.60 0.47 29.30 56.90 36.80 260.71 17.40 56.90 39.50 0.53 0.63 -0.059
> Qwen3-8b 66.65 84.10 23.27 216.91 43.30 84.10 40.80 0.54 33.33 51.10 23.70 107.03 25.60 51.10 25.50 0.57 0.49 -0.034
> Gemma-3-12b-it 56.55 34.40 29.53 325.26 34.40 84.70 50.30 0.49 29.43 26.90 3.37 3.95 26.90 31.70 4.80 0.51 0.01 -0.025
> Gemma-3-27b-it 44.40 43.20 1.60 120.02 33.40 62.40 29.00 0.54 26.75 26.00 1.00 62.91 19.00 39.80 20.80 0.62 0.52 -0.075
> Gpt-oss-20b 95.40 96.30 1.20 3.36 92.40 97.30 4.90 0.63 53.95 52.10 2.47 27.79 49.30 62.90 13.60 0.46 8.26 0.176 Phi-4 50.33 71.30 27.97 207.38 33.60 71.30 37.70 0.51 31.05 39.80 11.67 26.80 26.50 39.80 13.30 0.48 0.13 0.029

I.2 Real benchmark - detailed results 

For all the real-life results reported in Tables 6 to 10 and Figures 4 and 17 to 20, we highlight the absolute difference between original and attacked performance closer to zero, a lower variance ratio score, and negative SCORE values. These statistics demonstrate which models achieve more stable performance results while consistently choosing similar answers. 

I.3 On the SCORE paradox - capturing bias 

While positive SCORE difference values on real-life benchmarks might look like failure modes, we note that a model that gets every question wrong in their original permutation, but correctly identifies the present biases under-attack permutations, would achieve a SCORE of 0.6, 0.66, and 0.81, when the number of possible answers is four, five, and ten, respectively. To show this paradox, we demonstrate additional result on CommonsenseQA [ 29 ] without changing the few-shot prompt examples, just like in GPQA [ 23 ] evaluation. We present the results in Figure 16 and the detailed results in Table 11 and Table 12. 

23 Table 6: Detailed results on CommonsenseQA [29]. 

S&L M&D Model name ACC M ean ACC ORG |∆ACC | σ2 ACC min ACC max ∆max −min SCORE ACC M ean ACC ORG |∆ACC | σ2 ACC min ACC max ∆max −min SCORE σ2 

> Ratio

∆SCORE 

Deepseek-r1-0528-qwen3 64.18 42.92 25.51 94.43 42.92 70.84 27.92 0.46 52.32 52.66 0.41 0.48 51.19 53.40 2.21 0.46 0.01 0.002 Deepseek-r1-distill-qwen 61.08 53.15 9.52 33.58 53.15 68.88 15.73 0.51 52.50 50.29 2.65 1.28 50.29 53.97 3.68 0.54 0.04 -0.025 

Llama-3.1-8b-instruct 76.93 75.59 1.61 3.01 74.77 80.02 5.25 0.78 75.54 75.51 0.03 5.07 71.99 79.69 7.70 0.78 1.69 -0.001 

Ministral-3-8b-base 67.53 64.86 3.20 21.28 63.47 77.07 13.60 0.61 64.30 62.90 1.69 7.36 59.95 68.30 8.35 0.63 0.35 -0.018 

Nvidia-nemotron-3-nano 84.77 63.88 25.06 98.58 63.88 94.35 30.47 0.77 73.68 72.65 1.24 0.79 72.65 75.18 2.53 0.75 0.01 0.015 Nemotron-cascade-8b 86.21 83.95 2.72 2.89 83.95 88.86 4.91 0.90 84.47 83.54 1.11 0.30 83.54 85.26 1.72 0.90 0.10 0.005 Qwen3-14b 86.27 84.19 2.50 1.43 84.19 88.29 4.10 0.91 84.61 84.44 0.21 0.01 84.44 84.77 0.33 0.91 0.01 -0.003 

Qwen3-30b-a3b-instruct 87.00 86.24 0.92 1.61 85.50 88.53 3.03 0.93 85.66 85.26 0.47 1.07 84.28 86.98 2.70 0.91 0.66 0.018 Qwen3-8b 85.03 83.29 2.08 1.77 83.29 86.98 3.69 0.88 83.36 83.21 0.18 0.73 82.23 84.77 2.54 0.89 0.41 -0.005 

Gemma-3-12b-it 81.65 79.93 2.07 5.92 78.95 86.16 7.21 0.88 80.52 79.69 1.00 3.90 77.97 82.56 4.59 0.88 0.66 0.003 Gemma-3-27b-it 82.51 80.67 2.21 2.90 80.67 85.50 4.83 0.89 82.30 81.90 0.48 0.64 81.57 83.87 2.30 0.90 0.22 -0.002 

Gpt-oss-20b 82.72 74.28 10.13 19.35 74.28 88.45 14.17 0.78 72.29 72.24 0.06 1.11 70.76 74.04 3.28 0.69 0.06 0.086 Phi-4 84.38 83.13 1.50 2.55 82.88 87.14 4.26 0.88 79.21 77.97 1.49 1.01 77.89 80.59 2.70 0.82 0.40 0.058 Table 7: Detailed results on ARC [8]. 

S&L M&D Model name ACC M ean ACC ORG |∆ACC | σ2 ACC min ACC max ∆max −min SCORE ACC M ean ACC ORG |∆ACC | σ2 ACC min ACC max ∆max −min SCORE σ2 

> Ratio

∆SCORE 

Deepseek-r1-0528-qwen3 74.67 64.68 12.48 25.60 64.68 78.44 13.76 0.57 67.75 66.26 1.86 2.27 65.90 69.76 3.86 0.56 0.09 0.012 Deepseek-r1-distill-qwen 74.28 67.78 8.12 11.05 67.78 76.89 9.11 0.59 70.10 68.74 1.70 1.49 68.74 72.01 3.27 0.64 0.14 -0.051 

Llama-3.1-8b-instruct 85.47 87.57 2.63 10.05 81.99 90.61 8.62 0.89 88.21 88.19 0.02 1.05 86.56 89.63 3.07 0.88 0.10 0.009 Ministral-3-8b-base 82.96 81.57 1.74 2.78 81.12 85.79 4.67 0.75 77.72 76.94 0.98 2.26 76.47 80.64 4.17 0.72 0.81 0.024 Nvidia-nemotron-3-nano 91.93 90.33 2.00 3.47 89.40 94.31 4.91 0.87 89.57 88.92 0.81 0.23 88.92 90.39 1.47 0.84 0.07 0.029 Nemotron-cascade-8b 96.63 96.42 0.26 0.11 96.17 97.13 0.96 0.97 96.04 95.91 0.16 0.04 95.83 96.34 0.51 0.97 0.35 0.003 Qwen3-14b 97.67 97.44 0.29 0.03 97.44 97.86 0.42 0.98 95.22 95.07 0.19 0.10 94.81 95.72 0.91 0.94 2.82 0.044 Qwen3-30b-a3b-instruct 98.14 97.89 0.31 0.02 97.89 98.31 0.42 0.99 97.09 97.18 0.12 0.03 96.82 97.29 0.47 0.97 1.08 0.016 Qwen3-8b 97.32 96.93 0.48 0.08 96.93 97.69 0.76 0.98 97.00 96.65 0.44 0.08 96.65 97.44 0.79 0.97 0.96 0.003 Gemma-3-12b-it 95.92 96.11 0.24 0.15 95.24 96.42 1.18 0.97 95.71 95.86 0.19 0.06 95.26 95.94 0.68 0.97 0.37 0.001 Gemma-3-27b-it 96.61 96.62 0.01 0.06 96.31 97.07 0.76 0.98 96.61 96.65 0.05 0.02 96.36 96.79 0.43 0.98 0.38 -0.001 

Gpt-oss-20b 92.53 87.88 5.82 5.50 87.88 94.17 6.29 0.88 88.75 89.46 0.89 0.37 87.85 89.46 1.61 0.86 0.07 0.020 Phi-4 97.00 96.93 0.09 0.07 96.76 97.49 0.73 0.98 93.46 93.38 0.09 0.05 93.07 93.71 0.64 0.91 0.75 0.064 

As shown in Figure 16 and Table 12, the biases introduced by the few-shot prompt also significantly affect the SCORE score under the S&L metric. Under bias, SCORE M&D is lower than SCORE S&L by 1%. However, without permuting any examples from the original few-shot prompt, we observe an increased mean M&D SCORE compared to S&L by 1.4%. Interestingly, we observe that SCORE under the S&L benchmark changes drastically depending on whether the few-shot prompt contains a malicious answer distribution. In contrast, the M&D score remains relatively stable, demonstrating that our evaluation protocol is robust to the few-shot prompt bias. 

J Cross-Benchmark Agreement - Kendall Tau and Spearman differences 

Let Bi and Bj denote two benchmarks, and let xS&LBi and xS&LBj be the vectors of mean model performance, averaged across the original permutation and all moving-answer attack permutations, under the standard Select-and-Letter evaluation protocol (S&L) on benchmarks Bi and Bj , respectively. We define 

ρS&L(Bi, B j ) (6) as the Spearman rank correlation computed between xS&LBi and xS&LBj across all evaluated models. For brevity, we omit the benchmark arguments and refer to this quantity as ρS&L.Analogously, we define ρM &D or the proposed Matched-and-Dashed (M&D) evaluation protocol, as well as their Kendall rank correlation counterparts, τ S&L and τ M &D .To quantify changes in cross-benchmark agreement within the evaluation protocol, we consider the difference 

ρM &D − ρS&L. A positive value indicates stronger agreement between benchmarks under the M&D protocol, while a negative value indicates higher agreement under S&L. We define an analogous difference measure for Kendall’s tau, τ M &D − τ S&L.

24 Table 8: Detailed results on GPQA [23]. 

S&L M&D Model name ACC M ean ACC ORG |∆ACC | σ2 ACC min ACC max ∆max −min SCORE ACC M ean ACC ORG |∆ACC | σ2 ACC min ACC max ∆max −min SCORE σ2 

> Ratio

∆SCORE 

Deepseek-r1-0528-qwen3 25.31 27.23 2.40 15.53 18.97 29.24 10.27 0.39 23.35 23.44 0.11 3.51 20.54 25.67 5.13 0.44 0.23 -0.043 

Deepseek-r1-distill-qwen 31.56 33.93 2.96 16.11 24.55 36.61 12.06 0.43 28.03 28.57 0.67 2.97 25.22 30.36 5.14 0.45 0.18 -0.019 

Llama-3.1-8b-instruct 27.81 29.46 2.06 12.79 24.33 33.93 9.60 0.42 30.09 30.58 0.61 8.25 27.68 35.49 7.81 0.45 0.65 -0.028 

Ministral-3-8b-base 30.71 33.71 3.75 7.47 27.23 34.15 6.92 0.30 27.55 24.78 3.46 4.91 24.78 31.03 6.25 0.39 0.66 -0.095 

Nvidia-nemotron-3-nano 36.65 39.51 3.57 18.45 30.58 42.86 12.28 0.41 34.82 37.05 2.79 1.35 33.93 37.05 3.12 0.46 0.07 -0.052 

Nemotron-cascade-8b 49.46 50.89 1.78 1.51 47.54 50.89 3.35 0.56 49.64 52.01 2.96 2.32 47.77 52.01 4.24 0.57 1.54 -0.007 

Qwen3-14b 38.30 37.95 0.44 1.54 37.05 40.62 3.57 0.59 42.19 39.29 3.62 4.82 39.29 44.20 4.91 0.57 3.12 0.025 Qwen3-30b-a3b-instruct 50.63 49.78 1.06 3.92 47.99 54.02 6.03 0.63 49.33 50.22 1.11 5.82 46.65 53.35 6.70 0.56 1.49 0.069 Qwen3-8b 39.64 40.18 0.67 9.25 35.27 43.75 8.48 0.57 41.16 39.73 1.79 3.57 39.73 44.87 5.14 0.55 0.39 0.020 Gemma-3-12b-it 32.94 35.71 3.46 9.60 29.46 37.50 8.04 0.48 33.66 33.26 0.50 0.92 32.81 35.49 2.68 0.55 0.10 -0.063 

Gemma-3-27b-it 40.36 40.18 0.23 6.10 37.95 45.09 7.14 0.60 40.76 40.40 0.45 5.32 37.95 44.87 6.92 0.62 0.87 -0.019 

Gpt-oss-20b 45.62 46.65 1.28 2.64 43.08 47.77 4.69 0.47 36.65 36.38 0.34 4.61 33.04 39.51 6.47 0.49 1.74 -0.022 

Phi-4 35.49 36.61 1.39 14.54 31.70 42.41 10.71 0.50 33.75 34.15 0.50 2.95 31.03 36.38 5.35 0.50 0.20 -0.004 

Table 9: Detailed results on MMLU-Pro [34]. 

S&L M&D Model name ACC M ean ACC ORG |∆ACC | σ2 ACC min ACC max ∆max −min SCORE ACC M ean ACC ORG |∆ACC | σ2 ACC min ACC max ∆max −min SCORE σ2 

> Ratio

∆SCORE 

Deepseek-r1-0528-qwen3 31.57 35.30 4.11 4.07 27.66 35.30 7.64 0.33 31.29 36.12 5.31 3.85 28.95 36.12 7.17 0.29 0.94 0.047 Deepseek-r1-distill-qwen 31.56 31.33 0.25 33.83 21.53 39.74 18.21 0.34 27.71 28.47 0.83 1.39 26.10 29.72 3.62 0.30 0.04 0.036 Llama-3.1-8b-instruct 40.79 43.33 2.79 6.24 36.77 44.27 7.50 0.55 40.07 42.67 2.86 13.23 35.52 47.78 12.26 0.51 2.12 0.041 Ministral-3-8b-base 24.48 42.03 19.30 45.36 18.28 42.03 23.75 0.28 27.60 41.29 15.06 26.15 22.74 41.29 18.55 0.32 0.58 -0.043 

Nvidia-nemotron-3-nano 55.31 61.61 6.93 9.62 49.20 61.61 12.41 0.54 47.77 53.31 6.10 5.96 44.92 53.31 8.39 0.45 0.62 0.094 Nemotron-cascade-8b 57.26 61.96 5.17 9.43 52.41 61.96 9.55 0.66 49.55 58.03 9.33 15.18 42.93 58.03 15.10 0.56 1.61 0.098 Qwen3-14b 63.69 68.74 5.55 8.77 59.35 68.74 9.39 0.70 56.58 67.30 11.79 24.65 48.35 67.30 18.95 0.61 2.81 0.085 Qwen3-30b-a3b-instruct 74.53 74.55 0.02 0.72 73.44 76.33 2.89 0.84 66.97 70.85 4.26 2.22 65.54 70.85 5.31 0.72 3.08 0.115 Qwen3-8b 61.67 63.78 2.33 2.73 58.97 64.18 5.21 0.72 58.35 61.02 2.94 3.20 55.69 61.02 5.33 0.68 1.17 0.039 Gemma-3-12b-it 49.17 57.62 9.30 19.75 42.28 57.62 15.34 0.55 55.58 57.36 1.96 11.81 50.58 62.14 11.56 0.66 0.60 -0.114 

Gemma-3-27b-it 57.49 64.35 7.55 22.67 50.20 67.65 17.45 0.62 54.65 64.10 10.40 22.44 48.75 64.10 15.35 0.60 0.99 0.027 Gpt-oss-20b 54.84 57.38 2.80 3.53 52.48 58.01 5.53 0.47 42.78 54.00 12.34 13.89 39.44 54.00 14.56 0.42 3.93 0.047 Phi-4 43.18 58.47 16.82 37.01 35.83 58.47 22.64 0.40 39.58 52.79 14.54 28.26 34.32 52.79 18.47 0.35 0.76 0.050 Table 10: Detailed results on the subset of INCLUDE [ 27 ] consisting of French, German, Italian and Spanish languages. S&L M&D Model name ACC M ean ACC ORG |∆ACC | σ2 ACC min ACC max ∆max −min SCORE ACC M ean ACC ORG |∆ACC | σ2 ACC min ACC max ∆max −min SCORE σ2 

> Ratio

∆SCORE 

Deepseek-r1-0528-qwen3 52.72 41.24 14.35 39.16 41.24 58.88 17.64 0.38 44.06 43.90 0.20 1.29 41.97 45.29 3.32 0.43 0.03 -0.052 

Deepseek-r1-distill-qwen 39.61 29.77 12.30 27.08 29.77 45.35 15.58 0.38 31.32 29.35 2.46 3.19 28.93 32.91 3.98 0.41 0.12 -0.032 

Llama-3.1-8b-instruct 60.14 59.24 1.12 0.25 59.24 60.81 1.57 0.67 56.86 57.49 0.79 0.89 55.07 57.73 2.66 0.64 3.48 0.030 Ministral-3-8b-base 56.65 54.83 2.28 4.35 54.35 59.96 5.61 0.54 52.63 51.99 0.80 2.33 51.39 55.62 4.23 0.55 0.53 -0.008 

Nvidia-nemotron-3-nano 72.68 69.69 3.74 10.94 69.69 78.80 9.11 0.75 72.77 72.40 0.46 0.65 71.92 74.28 2.36 0.78 0.06 -0.032 

Nemotron-cascade-8b 69.47 67.15 2.90 5.77 67.15 73.13 5.98 0.77 67.73 67.93 0.25 0.89 66.67 69.08 2.41 0.77 0.15 0.005 Qwen3-14b 77.98 76.57 1.77 2.14 76.51 80.43 3.92 0.85 76.81 77.36 0.68 0.86 75.18 77.60 2.42 0.84 0.40 0.009 Qwen3-30b-a3b-instruct 79.01 78.02 1.24 3.89 76.21 81.82 5.61 0.87 76.10 75.91 0.24 1.19 74.52 77.78 3.26 0.83 0.31 0.043 Qwen3-8b 74.58 72.46 2.64 4.72 72.04 78.02 5.98 0.82 72.67 71.92 0.94 0.89 71.32 73.91 2.59 0.83 0.19 -0.003 

Gemma-3-12b-it 71.86 71.56 0.38 0.39 71.32 72.95 1.63 0.81 71.53 70.65 1.10 0.38 70.65 72.58 1.93 0.82 0.97 -0.009 

Gemma-3-27b-it 76.85 75.91 1.17 0.45 75.91 77.66 1.75 0.85 75.95 74.88 1.34 0.63 74.88 76.93 2.05 0.86 1.41 -0.008 

Gpt-oss-20b 74.58 66.12 10.57 18.66 66.12 77.90 11.78 0.71 67.21 67.03 0.22 0.13 66.67 67.69 1.02 0.67 0.01 0.040 Phi-4 72.25 71.14 1.39 2.42 69.99 74.52 4.53 0.80 70.71 70.89 0.22 0.74 69.02 71.32 2.30 0.77 0.31 0.038 Table 11: Detailed results on CommonsenseQA [ 29 ] without inducing malicious permutations on the few-shot prompt. S&L M&D Model name ACC M ean ACC ORG |∆ACC | σ2 ACC min ACC max ∆max −min SCORE ACC M ean ACC ORG |∆ACC | σ2 ACC min ACC max ∆max −min SCORE σ2 

> Ratio

∆SCORE 

Deepseek-r1-0528-qwen3 44.72 44.96 0.29 64.14 36.12 61.10 24.98 0.32 54.18 54.55 0.45 1.60 52.99 56.27 3.28 0.47 0.02 -0.153 

Deepseek-r1-distill-qwen 53.04 53.32 0.33 15.07 44.64 56.51 11.87 0.49 52.65 52.91 0.31 1.68 50.61 54.55 3.94 0.56 0.11 -0.068 

Llama-3.1-8b-instruct 74.24 75.59 1.62 2.70 70.93 75.68 4.75 0.78 74.23 75.35 1.35 1.29 72.40 75.51 3.11 0.78 0.48 0.002 Ministral-3-8b-base 61.68 64.86 3.81 14.12 58.23 68.55 10.32 0.59 62.84 63.39 0.65 1.43 60.20 63.72 3.52 0.63 0.10 -0.042 

Nvidia-nemotron-3-nano 74.11 74.04 0.08 4.34 70.76 77.89 7.13 0.76 73.76 72.89 1.05 0.61 72.73 74.77 2.04 0.77 0.14 -0.010 

Nemotron-cascade-8b 83.91 84.60 0.83 0.66 82.72 84.93 2.21 0.90 83.71 83.29 0.51 1.39 81.90 84.93 3.03 0.90 2.11 0.005 Qwen3-14b 83.61 84.52 1.10 0.82 81.74 84.52 2.78 0.89 84.41 84.52 0.13 0.56 83.29 85.75 2.46 0.91 0.69 -0.021 

Qwen3-30b-a3b-instruct 85.98 86.24 0.31 2.16 83.78 87.39 3.61 0.92 85.49 85.67 0.22 0.84 84.19 86.40 2.21 0.92 0.39 0.007 Qwen3-8b 82.64 84.03 1.67 1.28 80.43 84.03 3.60 0.87 83.05 83.13 0.10 0.53 82.31 84.44 2.13 0.89 0.41 -0.021 

Gemma-3-12b-it 79.77 79.93 0.19 12.52 72.73 83.54 10.81 0.88 79.28 79.28 0.00 6.46 74.53 81.82 7.29 0.88 0.52 -0.002 

Gemma-3-27b-it 81.07 80.67 0.48 2.74 78.38 83.13 4.75 0.89 81.34 81.74 0.48 3.96 77.31 82.96 5.65 0.89 1.44 0.003 Gpt-oss-20b 73.72 72.65 1.29 4.50 71.66 77.97 6.31 0.71 71.95 71.01 1.13 1.12 70.52 73.46 2.94 0.69 0.25 0.025 Phi-4 82.36 82.88 0.62 2.52 78.95 83.70 4.75 0.88 78.43 77.31 1.35 1.94 76.58 80.34 3.76 0.82 0.77 0.060 Table 12: SCORE comparison between results on CommonsenseQA [29 ] with and without few-shot distribution modification. 

CommonsenseQA (prompt modified) CommonsenseQA (prompt unmodified) Model name SCORE S&L SCORE M &D ∆SCORE SCORE S&L SCORE M &D ∆SCORE 

Deepseek-r1-0528-qwen3 0.458 0.455 0.002 0.317 0.471 -0.153 Deepseek-r1-distill-qwen 0.511 0.537 -0.025 0.489 0.557 -0.068 Llama-3.1-8b-instruct 0.783 0.785 -0.001 0.781 0.780 0.002 Ministral-3-8b-base 0.612 0.630 -0.018 0.586 0.628 -0.042 Nvidia-nemotron-3-nano 0.768 0.754 0.015 0.757 0.767 -0.010 Nemotron-cascade-8b 0.905 0.899 0.005 0.902 0.897 0.005 Qwen3-14b 0.906 0.909 -0.003 0.887 0.908 -0.021 Qwen3-30b-a3b-instruct 0.930 0.912 0.018 0.925 0.917 0.007 Qwen3-8b 0.882 0.888 -0.005 0.873 0.894 -0.021 Gemma-3-12b-it 0.884 0.881 0.003 0.876 0.878 -0.002 Gemma-3-27b-it 0.893 0.895 -0.002 0.891 0.888 0.003 Gpt-oss-20b 0.779 0.693 0.086 0.715 0.690 0.025 Phi-4 0.877 0.819 0.058 0.876 0.816 0.060 

Mean 0.784 0.774 0.010 0.760 0.776 -0.014 

25 Figure 15: An example few-shot prompt with a question from the ARC-Easy [ 8] dataset within our evaluation protocol. As with the MMLU-Pro [ 34 ] prompt, we add ”Let’s think step by step.” to induce Chain-of-thought reasoning. 26 Figure 16: Comparison of the matched prediction with dashes as labels (M&D; our method) with standard letter prediction with letters as labels (S&L) on CommonsenseQA [ 29 ] with a 5-shot prompt that preserves the original few-shot answers distribution . The boxes illustrate the model performance under all possibilities of ”answer-moving attacks”, where the whiskers indicate the minimum and maximum accuracy for each model. Each dot represents the performance of the original permutations. Additionally, each star symbolizes a SCORE [19] robustness metric. 

Figure 17: Comparison of the matched prediction with dashes as labels (M&D; our method) with standard letter prediction with letters as labels (S&L) on ARC [ 8 ] with a 5-shot prompt. The boxes illustrate the model performance under all possibilities of ”answer-moving attacks”, where the whiskers indicate the minimum and maximum accuracy for each model. Each dot represents the performance of the original permutations. Additionally, each star symbolizes a SCORE [ 19 ]robustness metric. 27 Figure 18: Comparison of the matched prediction with dashes as labels (M&D; our method) with standard letter prediction with letters as labels (S&L) on GPQA [ 23 ] with a 5-shot prompt. The boxes illustrate the model performance under all possibilities of ”answer-moving attacks”, where the whiskers indicate the minimum and maximum accuracy for each model. Each dot represents the performance of the original permutations. Additionally, each star symbolizes a SCORE [ 19 ]robustness metric. 

Figure 19: Comparison of the matched prediction with dashes as labels (M&D; our method) with standard letter prediction with letters as labels (S&L) on MMLU-Pro [ 34 ] with a 5-shot prompt. The boxes illustrate the model performance under all possibilities of ”answer-moving attacks”, where the whiskers indicate the minimum and maximum accuracy for each model. Each dot represents the performance of the original permutations. Additionally, each star symbolizes a SCORE [ 19 ]robustness metric. 28 Figure 20: Comparison of the matched prediction with dashes as labels (M&D; our method) with standard letter prediction with letters as labels (S&L) on the subset of common languages on the INCLUDE benchmark [ 27 ] with a 5-shot prompt. The boxes illustrate the model performance under all possibilities of ”answer-moving attacks”, where the whiskers indicate the minimum and maximum accuracy for each model. Each dot represents the performance of the original permutations. Additionally, each star symbolizes a SCORE [19] robustness metric. 29