Title: Exploring the Interplay Between Voice, Personality, and Gender in Human-Agent Interactions

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.10535v1

Published Time: Thu, 12 Feb 2026 01:30:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
> Preprint

Exploring the Interplay Between Voice, Personality, and Gender in Human-Agent Interactions 

KAI ALEXANDER HACKNEY, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA 

LUCAS GUARENTI ZANGARI, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA 

JHONATHAN SORA-CARDENAS ∗, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA 

EMMANUEL MUNOZ ∗, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA 

STERLING R. KALOGERAS ∗, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA 

BETSY DISALVO, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA 

PEDRO GUILLERMO FEIJÓO-GARCÍA †, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA 

To foster effective human-agent interactions, designers need to identify characteristics that could affect how agents are perceived and accepted, and to what extent they could impact rapport-building. Aiming to explore the role of user-agent synchrony, we assessed 388 participants to determine whether they could perceive personality traits from four artificial voices we selected and adapted from human samples, considering gender (male or female) and personality (introvert or extrovert) as grouping factors. Our findings suggest that participants were able to significantly differentiate female agents by personality, while male agents were not consistently distinguished. We also observed evidence of personality synchrony, where participants tended to perceive the first agent as more similar to their own personality, with this effect driven mainly by male participants, especially toward male agents. This paper contributes findings and insights to consider the interplay of user–agent personality and gender synchrony in the design of human–agent interactions. CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Natural language interfaces ; Sound-based input / output ; Empirical studies in HCI .Additional Key Words and Phrases: Human-AI Interaction, Human-Centered AI, Similarity-Attraction, User-Agent Synchrony 

ACM Reference Format: 

Kai Alexander Hackney, Lucas Guarenti Zangari, Jhonathan Sora-Cardenas, Emmanuel Munoz, Sterling R. Kalogeras, Betsy DiSalvo, and Pedro Guillermo Feijóo-García. 2026. Exploring the Interplay Between Voice, Personality, and Gender in Human-Agent Interactions. Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst. 37, 4, Article 111 (August 2026), 13 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX. XXXXXXX 

∗These authors contributed equally to this work. 

†Corresponding author. Authors’ Contact Information: Kai Alexander Hackney, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA, khackney7@gatech.edu; Lucas Guarenti Zangari, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA, lzangari3@gatech.edu; Jhonathan Sora-Cardenas, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA, jcardenas45@gatech.edu; Emmanuel Munoz, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA, emunoz31@ gatech.edu; Sterling R. Kalogeras, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA, skalogeras3@gatech.edu; Betsy DiSalvo, Georgia Institute of Technology , Atlanta, GA, USA, bdisalvo@cc.gatech.edu; Pedro Guillermo Feijóo-García, Georgia Institute of Technology , Atlanta, GA, USA, pfeijoogarcia@gatech.edu. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 

© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM 2476-1249/2026/8-ART111 https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. 

> arXiv:2602.10535v1 [cs.HC] 11 Feb 2026 Preprint

111:2 • Hackney et al. 

1 Introduction 

This paper examines the interplay of gender, voice, and personality in human-agent interactions, focusing on how gender and personality help shape user perceptions of virtual agent voices. We explore the role of vocal cues together with user personality and gender, as well as how users perceive both their own personality and that of virtual agents. For the scope of this work, virtual agents refer specifically to artificial voices without a visual or embodied component. Understanding how users perceive these agents is essential for designing purposeful interactions, as insights into the influence of gender, voice, and personality can support guiding more informed design choices. Prior research has reported on the similarity-attraction effect [ 4 ], which suggests that humans are drawn to others with similar characteristics, even in human-agent interactions [ 2 , 3 , 35 ]. For instance, researchers have examined whether the effect is driven by similarities in voice or by the alignment of user and agent personalities, with personality being identified as the leading factor [ 22 ]. Prior work has also reported on agent behaviors beyond words or pitch that can influence user perceptions [ 5 ], and on physical cues outside of vocal features that have been seen to play an important role in shaping user impressions of virtual agents [7, 16]. While previous research has supported the similarity-attraction effect in human-agent interactions [ 2 , 3, 10 –12 , 35 ] and shown that a variety of variables outside of vocal cues can impact user perception of agents [ 5 , 7, 16 ], much of this work has relied on virtual agents where personality, as a characteristic, was represented mainly through speed and volume [ 18 ]. Yet, if non-vocal cues can strongly shape perceptions of personality, it follows that relying on only a few vocal cues may not capture the full story. This narrow focus could have limited how designers considered the range of vocal features that affect user perceptions. Nass et al. [ 24 ] made this clear, showing that similarity-attraction did not stem from the user’s voice matching the agent’s vocal cues, but from user-agent personality synchrony. Therefore, this paper reports insights on the interplay of gender, voice, and personality to help design and tailor human-agent interactions. To do so, we pre-sampled users’ voices and their demographics to map user vocalics to their gender and personality, to generate scripted virtual agents to assess user perceptions in human-agent interactions. Our virtual agents featured representative vocalics of the pre-sample, mapped with users’ genders and personality traits. We then sampled 388 participants, grouped in two sets, to assess whether users were able to identify the virtual agents’ personality. Each set featured a setup in which each participant interacted with two virtual agents corresponding to the same gender (male or female) but coming from pre-sample users with different extroversion levels (introvert or extrovert). This was done to explore the effects of gender and user personality on user perceptions towards virtual agents and to address the following research questions (RQs): 

• RQ1 - Voice, Gender, and Personality : How do voice, gender, and personality cues interplay to shape user perceptions of virtual agents in Human-Agent interactions? 

• RQ2 - User-Agent Personality Synchrony : To what extent do users project their own personality traits onto virtual agents, and how does user-agent personality synchrony influence users perceptions in Human-Agent interactions? We assessed personality through the Ten Item Personality Measure (TIPI) scale, designed by Gosling et al. [ 14 ]. For the scope of this paper, based on the items from the TIPI scale, we refer to personality as the level of 

Extroversion an individual may have or may perceive from the virtual agent. 

2 Background 2.1 Personality Cues and Virtual Agents 

The influence of a personality similarity-attraction effect on people’s trust and perception has been a central focus in human-agent interaction studies. Zhou et al. [ 35 ] found that agents that align their personality traits with user expectations are trusted more, demonstrating the role of personality congruence. In the setting of in-car 

Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Preprint 

Exploring the Interplay Between Voice, Personality, and Gender in Human-Agent Interactions • 111:3 

speech interfaces, Braun et al. [ 3 ] showed that there was higher likability and trust for an assistant who matched the personality of the driver, and lower likability and trust for incorrectly matched personalities. Nass et al. [ 24 ]confirmed that people demonstrated a similarity-attraction effect regarding personality for computer-generated speech, even when personality is not relevant to that speech. In a study by Maxim et al. [ 22 ], it was found that matching a virtual human’s vocalic extroversion level with a participant’s extroversion level did not result in a similarity-attraction effect or impact the effectiveness of the mental health intervention. Instead, the participant’s own extroversion level was the primary factor influencing their ratings. Cumbal et al. [ 5 ] looked at three situations when an agent got interrupted by a human. The agent would either ignore the interruption, yield to the human, or acknowledge the interruption and finish its thought. The study’s results showed that this change in behavior impacted people’s perceptions of the agent’s personality as well as how much they enjoyed interacting with the agent. Other research has focused on methods for detecting and interpreting personality in both agents and users. Ishii et al. [ 16 ] showed that Big Five personality traits influence the automatic generation of nonverbal behaviors in virtual agents, showing that combining spoken language features with personality information enables the creation of more natural and socially believable behaviors such as eye gaze, head nods, hand gestures, and upper-body posture. Berkovsky et al. [ 1 ] explored using eye-tracking data to infer personality traits of study participants. They found that eye movement patterns correlate with and can predict personality traits, suggesting that personality inference can allow agents to dynamically adapt and present personalities in ways that foster trust and alignment. Peltonen et al. [ 25 ] discovered that smartphone usage patterns provide predictive signals of personality. Döllinger et al. [ 7] did a study evaluating how participants evaluate an agent’s personality and self-relatability based on their interaction. They found a positive relationship between personality similarity, self-attribution, and a sense of behavior-similarity. Even for agents with a dissimilar appearance, the sensation of appearance similarity is conserved. Lee et al. [ 17 ] showed that individuals either perceive the conversational agent as a human, speaker, system, or a space object. Participants who perceived the agent as human tended to base their gender decision on the agent’s vocal tone. Participants who perceived the agent as a speaker personified the physical device that they used to interact with the agent. Participants who perceived the agent as a system tended to visualize it as a machine. Finally, those who perceived the agent as a space object oftentimes reflected it as an open and shared resource. Esterwood et al. [ 8 ] analyzed 26 other HRI studies on if human personality can accurately predict robot acceptance. Their results did find a positive correlation, but they also found gaps in the literature, such as the need to examine a larger age range of participants. 

2.2 Gender Cues and Virtual Agents 

Previous studies have investigated the influence of gender on users’ relationships with virtual humans. Feijóo-García et al. [ 12 ] show that gender and vocal cues, such as accent, shape how users evaluate agents, with biases influencing whether they are perceived as credible or expert, highlighting that such perceptions are socially and culturally conditioned and making gendered and vocal signals critical factors in agent design. Similarly, Gilpin et al. [ 13 ] found that pitch-based cues predicted openness and neuroticism with particular accuracy, with conscientiousness and agreeableness more reliably classified in female speakers and neuroticism more accurately detected in male speakers, demonstrating that vocal features can act as gender-specific markers of personality that conversational agents may leverage to enhance social alignment and believability. The similarity-attraction effect has been widely documented in psychology and HRI, showing that people tend to perceive agents as more friendly when they share similar preferences. Bernier and Scassellati [ 2 ] demonstrated this principle in human–robot interactions, suggesting that general social mechanisms such as similarity-attraction also apply to virtual agents, shaping responses to cues like gender and voice. In line with this, Feijóo-García et al. [ 10 ] examined how gender 

Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Preprint 

111:4 • Hackney et al. 

synchrony between users, virtual agents, and designers influences trust and intentions toward wellness practices, providing evidence that demographic cues such as gender and vocal traits significantly shape perceptions of credibility and rapport, while highlighting user–agent synchrony as a mechanism for improving acceptance and effectiveness in mental health contexts. Recent work suggests that gender similarity interacts with other design factors such as voice and appearance. Feijóo-García et al. [ 11 ] investigated user–agent–designer interactions in the context of mental health support, examining whether demographic similarities influenced engagement. Their findings show that both user–agent and designer–agent similarity significantly shape how virtual humans are created and received, with visual and auditory cues often exerting greater influence than verbal information about the designer. Overall, these results indicate that gender functions as an important social cue in shaping impressions of credibility and expertise, but its impact is moderated by other factors such as voice, appearance, and contextual framing. Thus, while gender similarity can enhance acceptance and rapport, its contribution is best understood in relation to the broader set of design features that collectively influence user trust and engagement. 

2.3 Vocal Cues and Virtual Agents 

Many studies refer to vocal cues as a fundamental attribute that significantly affects the human-agent interaction. Research has revealed how, for humans, certain vocal attributes correlate to certain personalities, such as faster response times in extroverted individuals compared to introverted individuals, as well as the loudness of individuals regarding their personality [ 18 ]. Gilpin et al. [ 13 ] identified which vocal cues revealed personality traits through support vector machine classifiers. The subgroups mostly affected by pitch were openness and neuroticism, while prediction accuracy for conscientiousness and agreeableness were higher in the female subgroup, while neuroticism had improved prediction accuracies in the male subgroup. The results found in humans serve as the basis for the findings in virtual agents. Human-agent interactions are significantly influenced by the agent’s vocal cues. When presented in a real-world setting, users perceived their interactions as much more realistic and natural with generative AI voices rather than traditional text-to-speech, primarily due to the vocal attributes of the artificially generated voice compared to the monotony of traditional text-to-speech implementations [ 21 ]. The irregularities and variety in vocal cues directly affect how a user will perceive the human-agent interaction, as it parallels social cues, enhancing the believability of the interaction [ 16 ]. Looking at previous studies, Nass et al. [ 24 ] observed whether people demonstrated a similarity-attraction effect regarding personality for computer-generated speech, and given the experiment, the results show how the user’s personality made the most difference in the effect, rather than the individual’s voice. Similarly, Maxim et al. [ 22 ] was able to notice a similar effect when measuring vocalic extroversion level, as the participant’s own extroversion level made the most difference. However, it is important to note that personality is heavily integrated in their voice through their vocal cues, and it is important to keep this in mind when designing virtual agents. Across these various studies, it is clear as to how an agent’s vocal cues had a great effect in the human-agent interactions Individuals can also develop a bias based on an agent’s vocal traits. Braun et al. [ 3 ] designed in-car speech interfaces and tested various agents, and their results show how drivers enjoyed and trusted agents that better aligned with their own personality than those with a different personality based on their interactions while driving. These findings reveal how tuned human ears are in identifying and distinguishing a personality through a primarily voice-only modality, and are able to capture and perceive an identity. Similarly, Zalake et al. [ 34 ]reveals how vocal and verbal strategies used by agents can affect user decisions, thus showing how vocal cues influence behavioral outcomes. Looking at agents another way, Lee et al, [ 17 ] demonstrates how individuals conceptualize and visualize various voice-only agents based on their vocal cues, and those who illustrated a human-like figure often based their decision on certain vocal traits and compared that to individuals they have 

Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Preprint 

Exploring the Interplay Between Voice, Personality, and Gender in Human-Agent Interactions • 111:5 

previously experienced. Given certain vocal cues, it is clear to see how individuals can be biased towards some vocalic characteristics over others. 

2.4 User-Agent Similarity in Human-Agent Interactions 

Synchrony, which refers to the alignment of an agent with a user in terms of cues, styles, and behavior, forms a key piece of human-agent interaction research. Furthermore, synchrony plays a critical role in developing trust, credibility, and a user’s willingness to interact with virtual agents [19, 33]. Past work dives into providing a road-map for eliciting user-trust and self-disclosure through communicative alignment. Such work stresses the importance of consistency, transparency, and socially attuned responses as valuable instruments for promoting user trust [ 33 ]. Culminating with this are the findings of other past work showing that humans often entrust private information to virtual humans over actual humans due to social evaluation, judging, and being mitigated through the virtual human context [ 19 ]. Together, these findings suggest increases of openness in sensitive domains/conversations reflect the careful tuning of synchrony and alignment in agent communication, ultimately fostering safe spaces. However, when viewing synchrony under demographic and social dimensions, it becomes evident that trust and credibility hinge not only on user-agent similarity cues but on a combination of user-designer and user-agent similarity [ 10 ]. This yields a three-way intersection between users, agents, and designers that, according to past work, leads to increases in mental health practices when demographic factors such as gender and age are aligned [ 10 ]. These effects and their respective narratives showcase a new view of synchrony, one shaped not only by gender but also impacted by age-proximity. These factors, some superficial and others less, reveal that shaping credibility in virtual humans is a more complex balance than previous work has thought. The tightrope act synchrony factors play has also been the focus of past work. When examining human-robot interactions, prior research highlights that humans perceive robots more favorably when there are shared characteristics and preferences between the two [ 2]. Said work stresses that synchrony is not merely an aesthetic factor but rather one that taps into pre-established human-social evaluation mechanisms. Interestingly, synchrony between user and agent personality traits enhances relatability and self-attribution in psychotherapy contexts, despite differences in user and agent appearances [7]. In the end, past work agrees that user-agent synchrony is a mix of several factors, including communicative behavior, demographic cues, and personality similarity. Together, these three factors comprise a powerful driver for credibility and engagement in virtual humans. It’s clear that designing virtual humans matters not merely on effective communication but also on effective social and psychological similarity between users and agents. 

3 Methodology 

The user study took place in the Spring of 2025 at a large Southeastern institution in the United States. Prior to the execution of the study, we had a separate preliminary data collection with online participants in the United States who voluntarily agreed to be assessed about their personality traits and demographics, and submitted a voice recording of them reading a sample test we tailored from existing literature [ 9 , 32 ]. The preliminary data collection was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Anonymous University (Protocol No. IRB2025-303), and served to help the research team tailor the digital voices we used in our user study. This preliminary data collection took place via Prolific [27], Qualtrics, and Phonic (tool used to record participants’ voices). This user study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Anonymous University (Protocol No. IRB2025-303). It consisted of one week of data collection with all interactions being digital and asynchronous, taking place through institutional email and an online survey tool, Qualtrics. 

Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Preprint 

111:6 • Hackney et al. 

3.1 Preliminary Data Collection: Participants 

Our preliminary data collection provided the research team digital voices for the user study. We recruited adults (18 years of age or older) on the crowd worker platform, Prolific [ 27 ]. The inclusion criteria were; fluent in English and located in the United States. We did this preliminary data collection apart from the institute where our user study took place, to prevent individuals (in the institute) from communicating the goal of the study and to prevent participant overlap and potential biases. While we had 346 participants respond to our request on Prolific [ 27 ], only 13 included a voice recording, using the recording platform Phonic [ 26 ], as requested. Among those 13 responses, two were excluded as they presented scripts completely unrelated to what participants were asked to read out loud. A total of 11 voices were used for the research team to tailor four separate voices matching gender (male or female) with personality (introvert or extrovert) traits. The data reported in our preliminary data collection included ages: 20-29 years of age (n = 3), 30-39 years of age (n = 6), 40 years of age (n = 1), and 61 years of age (n = 1), and gender: Male (n = 6) and Female (n = 5). All participants were fluent English speakers, and one participant also reported frequently using Hindi. 

3.2 Preliminary Data Collection: Procedure 

This preliminary phase was conducted online and asynchronously through Prolific [ 27 ], taking an average of 16 minutes for participants to complete, with a maximum of 41 minutes taken. Compensation for participation was set at three (3) American dollars (USD), with an estimated completion time of 15 minutes. Participants responded to an online questionnaire in which they answered a series of questions about themselves and recorded themselves reading a given script we tailored from existing literature [ 9, 32 ]–prior research suggests that both passages are effective to gather comprehensive voice samples [29, 30]. Questions were organized into five blocks: 

Block 1 - Informed consent provided participants with Informed Consent information containing the details of the study and two multiple voice questions. Participants were asked to read and respond (1) if they were 18 years of age or older and fluent in English and (2) if they agreed to participate. 

Block 2 - Participant Information included a single question to gather the participant’s Prolific ID. 

Block 3 - Participant Personality asked participants to respond to the TIPI personality diagnostic [ 14 ]. This block included ten statements that participants would rank on a scale of one-seven based on how much they agreed with (1 being completely disagree and seven being completely agree). One attention check question was included to verify that participants were reading and responding accurately to the survey. The specific question we used was “I swim across the Atlantic Ocean to get to work everyday” asking users to respond to the question in the same manner as the TIPI diagnostic. 

Block 4 - Participant Recording asked the participant to answer three questions. The first was a question reiterating that valid participation required (1) the participant to fill out their Prolific ID once again in the Phonic [ 26 ] integration as well as (2) record themselves reading from a script provided to them. They were then asked to acknowledge that they understood the two requirements for valid participation. Participants were then presented with the Phonic survey and the script that they were asked to read. For the survey they were first asked to input their Prolific ID once more, then they were asked to record the given script. The script contained the grandfather passage and the rainbow passage [9, 32] in order to ensure a comprehensive speech sample was collected. 

Block 5 - Participants’ Demographics contained six questions, asking about participant age, ethnicity, gender, country of origin, city of origin, and frequently used languages 

Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Preprint 

Exploring the Interplay Between Voice, Personality, and Gender in Human-Agent Interactions • 111:7 

3.3 Preliminary Data Collection: Data Analysis 

The data from this preliminary data collection focused on obtaining vocal representations of an Extroverted Male, an Introverted Male, an Extroverted Female, and an Introverted Female. Of the Male participants, based on the TIPI scale exactly one participant received a score of one (1) on Extroversion and one participant received a score of seven (7) on Extroversion. After verifying that the recordings of these two participants had proper audio quality and followed the designated script they were selected as the Introverted and Extroverted Male voice samples respectively. For the Female participants, one participant had a score of seven (7) for Extroversion according to the TIPI scale, so after verifying that the recording had proper audio quality and followed the designated script, they were selected as the Extroverted Female voice samples. Finally, the Introverted Female voice sample came from the Female participant who scored the lowest Extroversion score (2.35 out of 7.00) according to the TIPI scale, after verifying that the recording had proper audio quality and followed the designated script. 

3.4 Preliminary Data Collection: Voice Generation 

After selecting the recordings to be used to represent each of the four voice types, Eleven Labs [ 15 ] was utilized to generate the artificial voices to be used in our user study. Eleven Multilingual V2 was the model used to generate all four voices (with settings of Stability: 50%, Similarity : 75%, Style Exaggeration : 0%, and Speaker boost : on). The only audio sample provided for each voice was the respective recording from the participant selected to represent that voice type based on gender and personality. The script used for the artificial voice was taken from Job Burnout [ 20 ] an article that discusses the rise of the term burnout within the field of psychology, as well as its causes and remedies. The same script was used for each of the four voices, lasting an average of four minutes 42 seconds across the voices. 

3.5 Participants 

A total of 429 adult (18 years of age or older) participants were recruited at a large Southeastern institution in the United States. Recruitment was conducted regardless of gender, age, ethnicity, or place of origin. Of our participants, only 388 completed the survey and provided informed consent. Participants were enrolled in the Spring of 2025 and were recruited from a single course within the Anonymous Computing Program at this Anonymous Institution. Our sample population was over 370 participants, which is the sample size required to have a confidence level of 95% with a 5% margin of error, assuming a population size of 10,000–we used the sample size calculator feature by Qualtrics [28]. Participants reported ages were 18 years of age (n = 114), 19 years of age (n = 142), 20 years of age (n = 93), 21 years of age (n = 29), 22 years of age (n = 4), and 23-29 years of age (n = 6). Participants reported spoken languages indicated that 157 participants were monolingual, and 231 were Multilingual. Participants reported being from 28 different countries: from the United States (n = 278) or other places (n = 110). Participants’ reported gender distribution was male (n = 276), female (n = 102), or other (n = 5). Five participants chose not to identify with any gender (n =5). 

3.6 Intervention 

This study was conducted online, asynchronously via Qualtrics, and was within-subjects. The estimated time was of 20 minutes and the average time taken on the survey was six hours, with a maximum time of 99.5 hours to complete. These timestamps, however, are believed to be unreliable as participants likely did not start and finish the survey in a single sitting. Participants were evenly and randomly assigned to one of four groups (see Figure 1), where the distinguishing feature of each group was the voices listened to and their order. Our four groups consisted of 1) listening to the Extroverted Male voice then listening to the Introverted Male voice. 2) listening to the Introverted Male voice then listening to the Extroverted Male voice. 3) listening to the 

Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Preprint 

111:8 • Hackney et al. 

Extroverted Female voice then listening to the Introverted Female voice. 4) listening to the Introverted Female voice then listening to the Extroverted Female voice (see Figure 1 for reference). 

Fig. 1. Sample Population and Participant Grouping 

The study consisted of six main blocks: 

Block 1 - Informed consent provided participants with Informed Consent information containing the details of the study and two multiple voice questions. Participants were asked to read and respond (1) if they were 18 years of age or older and fluent in English and (2) if they agreed to participate. 

Block 2 - Participant Personality asked participants to respond to the TIPI personality diagnostic. This block included ten statements that participants would rank on a scale of one-seven how much they agreed with (one being completely disagree and seven being completely agree). 

Block 3a - Participant listens to the first artificial voice based on their assigned group. After listening to the 5 minute recording the Participant was then asked to respond to the same TIPI personality diagnostic from Block 2, except they are answering regarding the voice they just heard rather than themselves. 

Block 3b - Participant listens to the second artificial voice based on their assigned group. The participant then repeats the answering of the TIPI scale again for the most recent voice. 

Block 4 - Artificial Voice Demographics are then asked of the participant regarding the believed demographics of the most recent voice they have listened to. These questions include voice age, ethnicity, and gender. 

Block 5 - Participants’ Demographics contained six questions, asking about participant age, ethnicity, gender, country of origin, city of origin, and frequently used languages. 

Block 6 - Participants’ Email is collected in order to ensure compensation could be administered according to IRB protocol. 

3.7 Analysis Strategy 

u Participants were first analyzed concerning their responses to Block 2 and the TIPI [ 14 ] questionnaire within. From their responses to the questionnaire we were able to calculate an Extroversion score for each participant. We then analyzed their responses to the questionnaires contained within Block 3a and 3b and calculated the Extroversion scores for the first and second voice the participant listened to, respectively. Participant demographics were also considered in our analysis, particularly gender as we aimed to explore the role of gender and its interplay with personality concerning the virtual agent voice. 

Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Preprint 

Exploring the Interplay Between Voice, Personality, and Gender in Human-Agent Interactions • 111:9 

For our analysis, we used nonparametric inferential statistical methods to compare subgroups and evaluate our hypotheses, considering that our data was ordinal in nature [ 31 ]. The methods used included the Mann-Whitney U Test [23] and Spearman’s Correlation Test [6]. 

4 ANALYSIS OF RESULTS 4.1 User Perceptions and the Interplay of Gender and Personality 

A total of 388 participants completed our task. When examining participants’ ability to distinguish personality cues from the agents’ voices, we observed results that differed by the gender of the agent. For female voices, participants (n=195) were able to significantly differentiate between the introverted and extroverted voices. We observed a significant negative correlation (rs=-0.533, n=195, p < .001), indicating that participants reliably identified the personality cues of the female voices. In contrast, for male voices, participants (n=193) presented no significant correlation between the introverted and extroverted voices (rs=0.0083, n=193, p = 0.30). 

Fig. 2. Extroversion Score Distribution (TIPI [14]) for Users’ First Interaction with a Female Voice 

To further examine whether the order of exposure influenced participants’ ability to identify personality, we conducted between-subject comparisons between those first voices participants interacted with. For the female agent, participants who listened to the introverted voice first (n=95) were compared with those who listened to the extroverted voice first (n=100). To do so we evaluated the hypothesis H1: Participants interacting with a female virtual agent will perceive different levels of Extroversion when interacting with female agents designed to portray introverted vs. extroverted personas. Our results showed a significant difference between groups in the reporting of extroversion scores for female virtual agents (Mann-Whitney U Test, U(1) = 7915, p <.001)– see Figure 2. Thus, H1 was accepted. For the male agent, participants who listened to the introverted voice first (n=94) were compared with those who listened to the extroverted voice first (n=99). To do so we evaluated the hypothesis H2: Participants interacting with a male virtual agent will perceive different levels of Extroversion when interacting with male agents designed to portray introverted vs. extroverted personas. No significant difference was observed concerning the reporting of extroversion scores for male virtual agents (Mann-Whitney U Test, U(1) = 4576, p = 0.85)–see Figure 3. Thus, H2 was rejected. Responding to the research question RQ1 - Voice, Gender, and Personality : How do voice, gender, and personality cues interplay to shape user perceptions of virtual agents in Human-Agent interactions? Our results provide valuable insights into the interplay between agent gender and user perceptions in Human-Agent interac-tions. First, with respect to female agent voices, participants were consistently able to identify the personality of the female agent. This, regardless of participants’ own gender, personality, and overall demographics. Female agents, generated from voice samples provided by female participants, were significantly differentiable based 

Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Preprint 

111:10 • Hackney et al. 

Fig. 3. Extroversion Score Distribution (TIPI [14]) for Users’ First Interaction with a Male Voice 

on personality. In other words, personality traits were successfully imbued into the female agents in a way that participants could reliably detect them. Even when only exposed to the first agent, we observed that our participants were able to distinguish between the introverted and extroverted female voices. In contrast, male agents were not perceived in the same way. Throughout all participant demographics and experimental conditions, male agents were not significantly differentiated by personality. Despite being generated using the same procedure followed for female agents, male agent voices were perceived as nearly identical in terms of Extroversion. This discrepancy suggests that multiple factors could underlie the reduced accuracy of user perception for male voices. One explanation could relate to the voice samples themselves, as participants’ self-reports of personality may not have translated as effectively into vocal cues for male voices. Moreover, certain demographic variables were not controlled in the sample selection, which could have influenced the quality of the voices used for our intervention. A noteworthy observation is that the introverted male voice portrayed a discernible US southern accent, which could have misguided participants’ perceptions by leading them to interpret the voice as more extroverted that intended. Overall, the gender of both participants and agents played a strong role in shaping user perceptions of agent personality. While female agent voices carried personality cues that were consistently recognized, male voices did not yield the same effect. Future research should explore the role of demographic variables, cultural associations, and the interplay of personality and sociophonetic cues such the spoken accent, to examine their relationships and possible effects in shaping perceptions in Human-Agent interactions. 

4.2 User Perceptions and User-Agent Personality Synchrony 

We also examined patterns of personality synchrony between participants and the perceived personality of the first voice they interacted with. Throughout the entire sample, a significant correlation was found (rs=0.124, n=388, p<.05), suggesting that participants perceived that first voice they interacted with had a personality that was similar to their own personality. When broken down by participant gender, this effect was observed only among male participants (rs=0.150, n=276, p<.05). However, among female participants (n=102), no significant correlation was observed (rs=0.025, n=102, p=0.80). These observations suggest that gender emerged as a key differentiator in whether participants’ own personality could influence their perceptions of a virtual agent’s voice. Particularly in regards to the first voice they interacted with, we observed that in situations where little information was available, participants appeared to project their own personality onto the agent, suggesting an expectation towards user-agent personality synchrony. This, in regards to the research question RQ2 - User-Agent Personality Synchrony : To what extent do users project 

Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Preprint 

Exploring the Interplay Between Voice, Personality, and Gender in Human-Agent Interactions • 111:11 

their own personality traits onto virtual agents, and how does user-agent personality synchrony influence users perceptions in Human-Agent interactions? It is important to note that when participants completed the TIPI [ 14 ] questionnaire for the second agent, no significant relationship was observed between participants’ self-perceived Extroversion and the perceived Extroversion of the second agent. Instead, the significant relationship was between the perceived Extroversion of the second and first agents, suggesting that once participants had an initial reference point, their evaluations were anchored in comparison rather than self-projection. This pattern indicates that expectations towards user-agent personality synchrony only occur in the absence of sufficient information about the agent and its characteristics. These findings contribute to a broader understanding of the factors that shape perceptions of personality synchrony. User personality was found to be an essential factor in shaping user perceptions of agents, but its influence was seen to rely on the amount of information available during the interaction. Designers of virtual agents should carefully consider how much personality information is provided early in an interaction, depending on whether they wish to allow user-agent synchrony to guide users impressions and acceptance towards agents. Future research may aim to replicate and expand on these findings with more extensive and diverse sample populations to better understand the role of user personality on perception of virtual agents and its impacts in different context such as education or mental health support. 

5 Conclusions and Future Work 

This study investigated how agent gender and voice personality could influence user perceptions of virtual agents. Our results demonstrate that participants were able to reliably identify personality cues in female voices, distinguishing between introverted and extroverted agents. In contrast, male agent voices were not consistently differentiated, suggesting that personality cues were less noteworthy or less effectively conveyed. These findings underscore that agent gender plays a key role in shaping user perceptions of personality, with female agent voices more effectively communicating Extroversion and Introversion than male voices. In addition to differences in perception by agent gender, our work also revealed patterns of user-agent personality synchrony. Throughout our sample population, our participants tended to perceive the first agent’s personality as similar to their own, suggesting user-agent synchrony expectations. This pattern was particularly evident among male participants and most pronounced in interactions with male agents, whereas no significant observations happened among female participants. Together, our findings highlight both the strengths and limitations of voice-based cues in shaping how users perceive the agent personality. Future work may expand observations and insights in several ways. First, by considering a larger and more diverse sample population with more control over the choice of voice samples and a more precise configuration of user and agent characteristics to evaluate their relationships. Additionally, future research should explore further the role of user-agent personality synchrony and how to tailor and represent personalities in human-agent interactions, evaluating its impact in contexts such as education and mental health support. Finally, our results can help inform design practices in our community. Designers of virtual agents should consider how gender, voice, and personality coexist in human-agent interactions, tailoring their relationships to decide whether they support the intended interaction goals based on user-agent synchrony of characteristics. 

6 Limitations 

This study has some limitations that should not be ignored. First, the voice samples were chosen based on self-reported personality, which may have not fully reflected the real vocal cues of Introversion and Extroversion. This was more noticeable for male voices. We also did not control for demographic factors beyond gender, which may have affected how voices were perceived and judged. 

Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Preprint 

111:12 • Hackney et al. 

Second, our participant group, while large enough for analysis, was not diverse enough to apply the findings to all populations. Also, as real interactions with agents are more complex, future research should look at other characteristics and their interplay with personality and user-agent synchrony expectations to better tailor Human-Agent interactions. 

Acknowledgments 

The authors thank all individuals who voluntarily participated in this study. Their input was essential for the outcomes reported in this manuscript. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 2434428. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. 

References 

[1] Shlomo Berkovsky, Ronnie Taib, Irena Koprinska, Eileen Wang, Yucheng Zeng, Jingjie Li, and Sabina Kleitman. 2019. Detecting personality traits using eye-tracking data. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–12. [2] Emily P Bernier and Brian Scassellati. 2010. The similarity-attraction effect in human-robot interaction. In 2010 IEEE 9th international conference on development and learning . IEEE, 286–290. [3] Michael Braun, Anja Mainz, Ronee Chadowitz, Bastian Pfleging, and Florian Alt. 2019. At your service: Designing voice assistant personalities to improve automotive user interfaces. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems .1–11. [4] Donn Byrne. 1961. Interpersonal attraction and attitude similarity. The journal of abnormal and social psychology 62, 3 (1961), 713. [5] Ronald Cumbal, Reshmashree Kantharaju, Maike Paetzel-Prüsmann, and James Kennedy. 2024. Let Me Finish First-The Effect of Interruption-Handling Strategy on the Perceived Personality of a Social Agent. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents . 1–10. [6] Joost CF De Winter, Samuel D Gosling, and Jeff Potter. 2016. Comparing the Pearson and Spearman correlation coefficients across distributions and sample sizes: A tutorial using simulations and empirical data. Psychological methods 21, 3 (2016), 273. [7] Nina Döllinger, Jessica Topel, Mario Botsch, Carolin Wienrich, Marc Erich Latoschik, and Jean-Luc Lugrin. 2024. Exploring agent-user personality similarity and dissimilarity for virtual reality psychotherapy. In 2024 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces Abstracts and Workshops (VRW) . IEEE, 424–427. [8] Connor Esterwood, Kyle Essenmacher, Han Yang, Fanpan Zeng, and Lionel Peter Robert. 2021. A meta-analysis of human personality and robot acceptance in human-robot interaction. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–18. [9] G. Fairbanks. 1960. Voice and Articulation Drillbook . Harper. https://books.google.com/books?id=qN1ZAAAAMAAJ [10] Pedro Guillermo Feijóo-García, Chase Wrenn, Alexandre Gomes de Siqueira, Rashi Ghosh, Jacob Stuart, Heng Yao, and Benjamin Lok. 2024. Exploring the effects of user-agent and user-designer similarity in virtual human design to promote mental health intentions for college students. ACM Transactions on Applied Perception 22, 1 (2024), 1–41. [11] Pedro Guillermo Feijóo-García, Chase Wrenn, Sterling Kalogeras, Chandler Payne, Benjamin Lok, and Olufisayo Omojokun. 2024. Effects of gender synchrony in user-agent interactions: integrating the designer as a product cue in virtual human design for mental health support. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Human-Agent Interaction . 123–131. [12] Pedro Guillermo Feijóo-García, Mohan Zalake, Alexandre Gomes de Siqueira, Benjamin Lok, and Felix Hamza-Lup. 2021. Effects of virtual humans’ gender and spoken accent on users’ perceptions of expertise in mental wellness conversations. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM international conference on intelligent virtual agents . 68–75. [13] Leilani H Gilpin, Danielle M Olson, and Tarfah Alrashed. 2018. Perception of speaker personality traits using speech signals. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–6. [14] Samuel D Gosling, Peter J Rentfrow, and William B Swann. 2003. A very brief measure of the Big-Five personality domains. Journal of Research in Personality 37, 6 (2003), 504–528. doi:10.1016/S0092-6566(03)00046-1 [15] ElevenLabs Inc. 2025. ElevenLabs: Free Text to Speech & AI Voice Generator. https://elevenlabs.io/. accessed September 11, 2025. [16] Ryo Ishii, Chaitanya Ahuja, Yukiko I Nakano, and Louis-Philippe Morency. 2020. Impact of personality on nonverbal behavior generation. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents . 1–8. [17] Sunok Lee, Sungbae Kim, and Sangsu Lee. 2019. " What does your Agent look like?" A Drawing Study to Understand Users’ Perceived Persona of Conversational Agent. In Extended abstracts of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–6. [18] Sinae Lee, Jangwoon Park, and Dugan Um. 2021. Speech characteristics as indicators of personality traits. Applied Sciences 11, 18 (2021), 8776. Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Preprint 

Exploring the Interplay Between Voice, Personality, and Gender in Human-Agent Interactions • 111:13 

[19] Gale M Lucas, Jonathan Gratch, Aisha King, and Louis-Philippe Morency. 2014. It’s only a computer: Virtual humans increase willingness to disclose. Computers in Human Behavior 37 (2014), 94–100. [20] Christina Maslach, Wilmar B. Schaufeli, and Michael P. Leiter. 2001. Job Burnout. Annual Review of Psychology 52, Volume 52, 2001 (2001), 397–422. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.52.1.397 [21] Andrew Maxim, Roshan Venkatakrishnan, and Benjamin Lok. 2025. Perceived Realism and Voice Naturalness of Virtual Humans: Structural Equation Modeling of Behavioral Intentions among Black American Adults. ACM Transactions on Applied Perception (2025). [22] Andrew Maxim, Mohan Zalake, and Benjamin Lok. 2023. The Impact of Virtual Human Vocal Personality on Establishing Rapport: A Study on Promoting Mental Wellness Through Extroversion and Vocalics. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents . 1–8. [23] Patrick E McKnight and Julius Najab. 2010. Mann-whitney U test. The Corsini encyclopedia of psychology (2010), 1–1. [24] Clifford Nass and Kwan Min Lee. 2000. Does computer-generated speech manifest personality? An experimental test of similarity-attraction. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 329–336. [25] Ella Peltonen, Parsa Sharmila, Kennedy Opoku Asare, Aku Visuri, Eemil Lagerspetz, and Denzil Ferreira. 2020. When phones get personal: Predicting Big Five personality traits from application usage. Pervasive and Mobile Computing 69 (2020), 101269. [26] Phonic. 2025. Phonic: Voice and Video Surveys. https://www.phonic.ai/. accessed September 12, 2025. [27] Prolific. 2025. Prolific: Easily collect high-quality data from real people. https://www.prolific.com/. accessed September 12, 2025. [28] Qualtrics. 2023. Sample size calculator. https://www.qualtrics.com/blog/calculating-sample-size/. Updated August 8, 2025; accessed September 11, 2025. [29] Jamie Reilly and Jamie L Fisher. 2012. Sherlock Holmes and the strange case of the missing attribution: A historical note on “The Grandfather Passage”. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 55, 1 (2012), 84–88. [30] Piotr Sorokowski, Agata Groyecka-Bernard, Tomasz Frackowiak, Aleksander Kobylarek, Piotr Kupczyk, Agnieszka Sorokowska, Michał Misiak, Anna Oleszkiewicz, Katarzyna Bugaj, Małgorzata Włodarczyk, et al . 2023. Comparing accuracy in voice-based assessments of biological speaker traits across speech types. Scientific Reports 13, 1 (2023), 22989. [31] Gail M Sullivan and Anthony R Artino Jr. 2013. Analyzing and interpreting data from Likert-type scales. Journal of graduate medical education 5, 4 (2013), 541. [32] C. Van Riper and R.L. Erickson. 1996. Speech Correction: An Introduction to Speech Pathology and Audiology . Allyn and Bacon. https://books.google.com/books?id=js8LAQAAMAAJ [33] Christopher You, Rashi Ghosh, Andrew Maxim, Jacob Stuart, Eric Cooks, and Benjamin Lok. 2022. How does a virtual human earn your trust? guidelines to improve willingness to self-disclose to intelligent virtual agents. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents . 1–8. [34] Mohan Zalake, Alexandre Gomes de Siqueira, Krishna Vaddiparti, and Benjamin Lok. 2021. The effects of virtual human’s verbal persuasion strategies on user intention and behavior. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 156 (2021), 102708. [35] Michelle X Zhou, Gloria Mark, Jingyi Li, and Huahai Yang. 2019. Trusting virtual agents: The effect of personality. ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems (TiiS) 9, 2-3 (2019), 1–36. 

Received XX Month XXXX; revised XX Month XXXX; accepted XX Month XXXX 

Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.