Title: Anthropomorphism on Risk Perception: The Role of Trust and Domain Knowledge in Decision-Support AI

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.13625v1

Published Time: Tue, 17 Feb 2026 01:28:08 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# Anthropomorphism on Risk Perception: The Role of Trust and Domain Knowledge in Decision-Support AI 

Manuele Reani a, ∗, Xiangyang He b, Zuolan Bao a

> aSchool of Management and Economics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
> bComputational Media and Arts, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China

Abstract 

Anthropomorphic design is routinely used to make conversational agents more approachable and engaging. Yet its influence on users’ perceptions remains poorly understood. Drawing on psychological theories, we propose that anthropomorphism influences risk perception via two complementary forms of trust, and that domain knowledge moderates these relationships. To test our model, we conducted a large-scale online experiment (N = 1,256) on a financial decision -support system implementing di ff erent anthropomorphic designs. We found that anthropomorphism indirectly reduces risk perception by increasing both cognitive and a ff ective trust. Domain knowledge moderates these paths: participants with low financial knowledge experience a negative indirect e ff ect of perceived anthropomorphism on risk perception via cognitive trust, whereas those with high financial knowledge exhibit a positive direct and indirect eff ect. We discuss theoretical contributions to human - AI interaction and design implications for calibrating trust in anthropomorphic decision-support systems for responsible AI. 

Keywords: 

Anthropomorphic design, Trust in AI, Risk perception, Decision-support systems, Human–AI interaction 

1. Introduction 

Digital assistants powered by large language mod-els (LLMs) are increasingly mediating decisions in cus-tomer service, education, healthcare, and finance. To make these systems feel more social and relatable, de-signers frequently employ anthropomorphic cues – e.g., human - like faces, names, avatars, and specific styles of verbal and non-verbal communication (typical of human-to-human interactions). Anthropomorphic design in Ar-tificial Intelligence (AI) seems to elicit greater engage-ment, adoption, trust, arousal, and likability [ 11 , 59 ]. Anthropomorphic cues, thus, greatly a ff ect human-AI in-teraction and represent a powerful lever that AI designers can exploit to influence users. However, humanising AI can create unrealistic expec-tations, ethical concerns, and unwanted consequences. For instance, anthropomorphic appearance seduces users into attributing more agency and competence to AI than warranted [ 45 ]. In fact, some evidence suggests that an-thropomorphism tends to increase trust and reduce risk   

> ∗Corresponding author
> Email address: reanimanuele@cuhk.edu.cn (Manuele Reani)

perception [ 17 ], a concerning e ff ect that can be prob-lematic, especially in high-risk contexts (e.g., financial investment and medical decision-making). Empirical evidence shows that, in certain circum-stances, users can follow AI advice that contradicts other available information, or even their own judgment [ 31 ]. Recent work found that participants consistently regard AI-generated content, despite being correct or incorrect, as more trustworthy, valid, and satisfying than advice written by doctors [ 55 ]. In high-stakes domains such as healthcare, placing excessive trust in online information (from search engines, social media, or AI) can lead users to defer to recommendations even when they are wrong, resulting in worse outcomes than if they had ignored the information [ 9 ]. These results further highlight the im-portance of understanding risk perception in the context of AI-aided decision-making. Responsible AI design, therefore, requires a nuanced understanding of how anthropomorphism can a ff ect trust and the perception of risk. Prior studies in the field of human-AI collaboration have examined anthropomor-phism, trust, and risk perception separately, but few in-tegrate these constructs into a comprehensive model, especially in the context of AI [ 4 ]. To complicate the  

> Preprint submitted to Elsevier February 17, 2026
> arXiv:2602.13625v1 [cs.HC] 14 Feb 2026

puzzle further, domain expertise has been shown to a ff ect how people perceive risk. In some research, people with greater domain knowledge perceive lower risk because their deeper understanding reduces reliance on heuris-tic cues [ 13 ]. Other studies, however, report that, in high-risk settings, risk perception increased with higher expertise [ 50 ]. This suggests that domain knowledge may moderate the e ff ects of anthropomorphic design on trust and risk perception in di ff erent ways. To ad-dress these gaps, and shed light on the interplay between these factors, we propose and test a moderated -mediation model linking anthropomorphic design, trust, and risk perception. The question of how a more anthropomorphic style might be beneficial /detrimental in scenarios where ratio-nality and a lack of emotion are preferred (e.g., finance) is relevant and timely, given the rise of chatbots and LLMs. The relationships between anthropomorphism, trust, and risk perception have been well-documented, although not in the same study – see Section 2. More-over, including domain knowledge in anthropomorphism research is intuitive and novel. Our contributions are fourfold: (1) we probe into the relationship between anthropomorphism design and risk perception by distinguishing cognitive and a ff ective trust as parallel mediators of the anthropomorphism-risk rela-tionship; (2) we examine domain knowledge as a mod-erator; and (3) we provide empirical evidence using a large -scale experiment with rigorous analyses, including multi -group SEM and robustness checks. Finally, (4) we discuss the design implications of such a human-AI interaction model. 

2. Related Work 

2.1. Benefits of Anthropomorphic Design 

Anthropomorphism refers to the human tendency to at-tribute human qualities to non - human entities [ 18 , 3, 69 ]. Besides people’s natural tendency to anthropomorphize technology, this tendency can be amplified by the sci-entific community’s e ff ort of ”designing anthropomor-phism” [ 51 ]. Thus, anthropomorphic design is the sci-ence and practice of making a technological artefact more human-like or making such an artefact behave like a human. Research has shown that the anthropo-morphic design of AI has several benefits, including an increased adoption of and intention to use such technolo-gies [ 14 , 60 ]. Designers leverage anthropomorphic cues – i.e., names, avatars, and language – to evoke social presence and engagement [ 54 , 6, 30 ]. Such a design can positively a ff ect business and bring a better experience to users. However, the same techniques that make AI sys-tems more engaging can also have unintended side eff ects. By triggering social heuristics and “comput-ers as social actors” responses [ 43 ], anthropomorphic cues can lead people to ascribe agency, benevolence, and competence to AI systems that exceed their actual capabilities [ 67 , 47 , 22 ]. In low - stakes settings, this may primarily influence likability, but in high - stakes decision - support contexts such as healthcare and finance, these shifts in perception may systematically bias how people judge the trustworthiness and riskiness of AI ad-vice. This tension between user experience benefits and potential miscalibration of trust and risk perception mo-tivates a closer examination of anthropomorphic design in decision-support AI. 

2.2. Cognitive and A ff ective Trust in AI 

Trust is a multifaceted construct. Specifically, two dimensions of trust have been identified. Cognitive trust involves rational evaluations of an agent’s ability, reliabil-ity, and transparency; a ff ective trust arises from warmth, empathy, and emotional bonds [26, 34]. Research on social robots and AI agents shows that anthropomorphism can a ff ect trust. For instance, some research shows that an anthropomorphic appearance (human-like voice and faces) increases perceived trust and makes AI systems seem more competent and warm; with warmth signaling benevolent intent, while compe-tence signaling (expected) ability [ 34 ]. The reason why this happens is not fully understood. Recent work empha-sizes the role of anthropomorphism in improving trust via social presence and provides an explanation, albeit partial, by focusing on a ff ective trust [ 33 ]. Cognitive trust, which is linked to competence and expectations, is not accounted for by this explanation. Some earlier research has already shown that users interacting with anthropomorphized digital assistants (e.g., human names and communication style) expect them to behave like competent human aides [ 37 ]. Moreover, in other do-mains, research has shown that (cognitive) trust mitigates uncertainty and, thus, reduces perceived risk [ 68 ]. Thus, fragmented research has overall shown the benefit of AI anthropomorphism on both cognitive and a ff ective trust, but not how these two dimensions of trust are a ff ected di ff erently by such designs. 

2.3. Risk Perception in Anthropomorphic Design 

According to the so-called psychometric paradigm of risk perception pioneered by Paul Slovic, risk can be defined as the ”quantitative measure of hazard conse-quences [i.e., threats to humans and what they value] 2expressed as conditional probabilities of experiencing harm” [ 57 ]. The term ”risk perception” can be simply understood as people’s intuitive judgment, measurement, and evaluation of hazardous activities – e.g., financial investments – and the interaction with new technologies – e.g., AI systems [ 58 ]. In our study, risk perception refers to the user’s judgment of how risky it would be to follow an AI advisor’s recommendation (e.g., financial invest-ment), which could carry serious negative consequences (e.g., financial loss). Early work in non-AI contexts already anticipated that anthropomorphic design (placing human eyes on machines used for gambling) can a ff ect risk perception [ 28 ]. Such work demonstrated that anthropomorphism increases risk perception for people with low power and decreases it for those with high power – here “power” is a situational psychological state indicating how much control and agency a person feels they have at a given moment. Morana et al. [39] studied the e ff ect of di ff er-ent levels of chatbot anthropomorphism (human names, avatars, and the manipulation of language cues) on the likelihood of following the recommendations given by the robo-advisor in an investment consultation scenario. In their research, risk perception was not the primary focus of the study; rather, it was implicitly linked to the likelihood of following the recommended financial advice. Nevertheless, they did measure individual risk level as a control factor. Thus, they already anticipated (without directly testing) that the manipulation of anthro-pomorphism in chatbot systems may indeed a ff ect risk perception [ 39 ]. Aubel et al. [4] examined how visual an-thropomorphism influences risk perception in a banking context. They manipulated only the agent’s appearance (from more machine-like to more human-like) and then assessed how risky users perceived the interaction to be. The results show that anthropomorphism, indeed, aff ects risk perception in a non-monotonic (uncanny-valley) pattern. Finally, Cohn et al. [17] studied how users anthropomorphize LLM systems (through the ma-nipulation of linguistic /modality cues) and how they trust the information the system provides. The results of this study show that perceived anthropomorphism indeed in-creases the perception of accuracy of the information (thus, related to competence, which is an element of cog-nitive trust) and, in turn, reduces risk ratings over the consequences of potential misinformation. These results show a clear e ff ect of anthropomorphism on risk percep-tion. Nevertheless, this study did not take into account domain knowledge, which appears to play a moderating role in risk contexts. Indeed, in recent research, it was found that expertise increases risk perception [ 50 ] and that experts rely less on anthropomorphic cues [13]. 

2.4. Domain Knowledge in High-stakes Domains 

Finance is a paradigmatic high - stakes domain where misaligned trust and risk perception have direct monetary and welfare consequences. Commercial robo - advisors and banking chatbots are increasingly deployed with human -like names, avatars, and conversational styles (e.g., “Erica”, “Cora”) to emulate a human financial ad-visor and lower adoption barriers [ 5 , 52 ]. Empirical work suggests that such cues can meaningfully change how people evaluate financial advice: anthropomorphic robo -advisors can increase perceived usefulness, trust, and willingness to invest, partly by raising certainty about the advisor’s competence and lowering perceived risk [ 5, 23 ]. Recent experimental evidence further in-dicates that anthropomorphic framing of a financial AI advisor can reduce perceived risk via increases in both cognitive and a ff ective trust, especially among lay in-vestors [ 47 ]. Together with findings that experts are more skeptical of anthropomorphic AI and perceive higher risk in AI - supported decisions [ 50 , 13 ], this body of work suggests that anthropomorphic design may systemati-cally benefit novice users while simultaneously creating conditions for overtrust and miscalibrated risk perception in financial decision-support. To conclude, a growing but still fragmented body of work across chatbots, social robots, and financial decision -support systems suggests that anthropomorphic cues may increase trust and, in some populations, reduce perceived risk. However, existing studies typically fo-cus either on average e ff ects of anthropomorphism on trust [ 39 , 54 , 65 , 5] or on its impact on risk perception in specific scenarios [ 28 , 4 , 17 ], and rarely model the underlying trust processes or their interaction with user expertise. In particular, prior research has not systemati-cally examined how cognitive and a ff ective trust jointly mediate the link between perceived anthropomorphism and risk perception, nor how domain experts and lay people may respond di ff erently to the same anthropo-morphic cues in high -stakes financial advice. Our study addresses this gap. 

2.5. Research Gaps and Objective 

A human-like presentation can be counterproductive in settings where analytical detachment is valued, such as finance, making this question especially salient in the era of LLMs and chatbots. Prior work has linked anthropomorphism to trust [ 39 ] or perceived risk [ 4 ], though rarely within a single integrated study. Adding domain knowledge as a moderating factor is both in-tuitive and, to our knowledge, relatively novel in this line of research. Current literature lacks an integrative 3human-AI interaction model that connects anthropomor-phic design, dual trust processes, and risk perception while accounting for user expertise. Most prior stud-ies in anthropomorphic AI examine either cognitive or aff ective routes, seldom both simultaneously. Few inves-tigate how domain knowledge moderates these routes or test models using large samples. Moreover, many studies focus on embodied robots or low - stakes conver-sational agents; little is known about anthropomorphic decision -support systems in high - stakes domains (e.g., financial investment). Our work addresses these gaps by proposing a moderated - mediation model and empiri-cally testing it using a large sample while manipulating anthropomorphic design in an AI system. In this work, we consider the e ff ect of perceived do-main knowledge on the relationship between AI anthro-pomorphism and human perception (risk perception and trust), for a holistic understanding of how humans react to humanized bias. 

3. Theory and Hypotheses 

The e ff ect of the anthropomorphic design of AI agents on perceived anthropomorphism (the human perception of non-human entities – see Bartneck et al. [7] ) is well documented [ 6, 61 ]. Thus, we consider such a design an antecedent of perceived anthropomorphism, which is the actual predictor of our framework. As suggested in previous work [ 28 , 1, 39 , 4], the design of technolog-ical artifacts, including AI, especially the use of cues that make such technologies look or behave like humans, aff ects risk perception. This, however, appears to be contingent on high-risk environments [ 1]. Thus, there are reasons to believe that perceived anthropomorphism aff ects risk perception in high-risk scenarios (e.g., finan-cial investing), albeit it is not clear whether this e ff ect is direct or mediated by trust. Kim and McGill [28] ’s results are mixed since they found anthropomorphism to increase risk perception for some individuals and reduce it for others (see the model development in the next sub-section). Likewise, Aubel et al. [4] reported that high anthropomorphism increases risk perception, but this re-lationship is dependent on the design of AI. Therefore, our initial hypothesis, the base hypothesis, is confirma-tory and serves the purpose of assessing whether there is a direct e ff ect, either positive or negative, of perceived anthropomorphism on risk perception, thus: 

• H1: Perceived anthropomorphism of chatbots will aff ect risk perception (non-directional). It is worth noting that, in our investigation, we focus on perceived anthropomorphism, rather than its design, for three reasons. First, trust and risk perception are psychological responses to how human-like AI feels to a user. Two participants can see the identical interface (i.e., same design cues), yet experience di ff erent human-likeness [ 53 , 6 ]. Rather than the design code per se, it is that experienced human-likeness (i.e., perceived anthro-pomorphism) that a ff ects other perceptions (e.g., trust and risk perception). Second, traits such as individual an-thropomorphism tendencies or prior chatbot experience may modulate how strongly the same cues translate into perceived human-likeness. Perceived anthropomorphism naturally absorbs this heterogeneity; anthropomorphic design cannot. Finally, perceived anthropomorphism travels better than a specific cue recipe. Practitioners rarely reproduce the exact design combinations used in experiments; what generalizes is the level of perceived human-likeness. Modeling perception rather than design makes findings portable to future systems that achieve similar perceived anthropomorphism with di ff erent cue mixes. 

3.1. Research Framework 

Studies investigating the relationships between anthro-pomorphism and trust have shown that users are more likely to trust anthropomorphized agents to make deci-sions – e.g., investing [ 65 ]. Morana et al. [39] found that an increased level of anthropomorphism of chatbots increases users’ trusting beliefs towards those chatbots. Beyond these individual studies, a broader body of re-search in HCI, social robotics, and decision-support sys-tems has consistently shown that anthropomorphic cues (e.g., human-like names, faces, and conversational styles) strengthen users’ perceptions of competence, benevo-lence, and integrity and thereby increase trust in AI agents [ 42 , 46 , 44 , 64 ]. Meta-analytic evidence in hu-man–robot interaction further indicates a robust positive eff ect of anthropomorphism on user trust across a wide range of artificial agents [ 49 ]. In general, these findings support the view that anthropomorphism in AI tends to increase user trust [54]. In addition, earlier research has extensively shown that trust is negatively correlated with risk perception, espe-cially those elements of trust related to competence [ 56 ]. If anthropomorphism increases trust and trust reduces risk perception, then, by transitivity, anthropomorphism should reduce risk perception. 

3.1.1. A Dual Route to Trust. 

Previous research on trust separates cognitive trust from a ff ective trust [ 26 ]. On the one hand, cognitive trust is knowledge-driven and includes elements of the 4trustee’s competence, expertise, reliability, and perceived performance [ 38 , 48 ]. On the other hand, a ff ective trust is related to emotional connections and the trustee’s benev-olence and is the confidence placed in another person on the basis of feelings generated by the level of care and concern the person demonstrates [ 27 , 48 ]. In our ana-lytical model of risk-relevant perceptions (the research framework), trust is seen as an intermediate psychologi-cal state (a mediator) between perceived anthropomor-phism and risk perception. 

3.1.2. Cognitive Trust as a mediator. 

The manipulation of anthropomorphism, especially the utilization of certain communication cues – e.g., the use of informal expressions in communication [ 54 ] – can make the advisor look friendly but, at the same time, less competent or less professional [ 12 , 20 ]. In certain contexts (e.g., finance), a machine-like style of communication may look more professional (albeit less warm and emphatic) and, thus, may convey more compe-tence than an informal and friendly style of communica-tion [ 29 , 41 , 62 ]. It follows that increasing anthropomor-phism of advisory AI with specific design choices may reduce perceived competence. In turn, low competence has been shown to increase risk perception [63]. In the trust model described earlier, competence is captured by the cognitive component of trust [ 26 ]. Thus, manipulating anthropomorphism in AI systems that are used to communicate information that bears risk to users may a ff ect cognitive trust to some extent. In our model, we posit that cognitive trust is a mediator in the rela-tionship between anthropomorphism and risk perception. Thus, we propose the following hypotheses: 

• H2: Cognitive trust will mediate the e ff ect that an-thropomorphism has on risk perception. 

– H2A: Anthropomorphism will increase cogni-tive trust. 

– H2B: Cognitive trust will decrease risk per-ception. 

3.1.3. A ff ective Trust as a mediator. 

In their research, Aubel[ 4], speculated that the e ff ect of anthropomorphism on risk perception might be due to an “a ff ect heuristic” for risk perception – i.e., an emo-tional response to the stimuli – a concept that is closely related to the a ff ective dimension of trust. In the case of anthropomorphic AI, a human-like communication style better resonates with our a ff ective state, increasing our trust in the source of the message [ 54 ], provided that such a source is competent and professional. It follows that perceived anthropomorphism may positively a ff ect aff ective trust. However, whether this, in turn, lowers risk perception is not clear from the literature. For this dimension, we posit the following three hypotheses: 

• H3: A ff ective trust will mediate the e ff ect that an-thropomorphism has on risk perception. 

– H3A: Anthropomorphism will increase a ff ec-tive trust. 

– H3B: A ff ective trust will a ff ect risk perception (non-directional). 

3.1.4. Contradiction in the literature and the role of Domain Knowledge. 

As reported above, by the transitivity principle, if an-thropomorphism increases trust and trust decreases risk perception, then anthropomorphism should reduce risk perception. However, the research by Kim and McGill [28] found that, although anthropomorphized objects generally generate a positive attitude towards those ob-jects, when they bear risk, the e ff ect may not be posi-tive. This suggests that, in high-risk settings, artifacts resembling humans can increase, for certain individuals, the risk perception of what those artifacts are prompt-ing the user to do (e.g., gambling). Similarly, Aubel et al. [4] found a greater risk perception when anthro-pomorphism is high. However, it is not clear why an-thropomorphism increases trust [ 39 , 54 , 65 ] and also risk perception [ 4 , 28 ], given that trust and risk percep-tion tend to be negatively correlated [ 25 ]. We posit that domain knowledge is the potential candidate that may shed light on these relationships, given that, in high-risk settings, higher expertise increases risk perception [ 50 ]and negatively a ff ects trust in AI-based decision support systems [8]. Thus: 

• H4: Domain knowledge will increase risk percep-tion. 

– H4a: Domain knowledge moderates the e ff ect that anthropomorphism has on cognitive trust. 

– H4b: Domain knowledge moderates the e ff ect that anthropomorphism has on a ff ective trust. These relationships and the complete research frame-work are shown in Figure 1, and the collection of hy-potheses is shown in Table 1. 

3.2. Variable Definitions 

To clarify the framework, here we describe our vari-ables, what they represent, and how they are measured, including the reference for the questionnaires used. 5Figure 1: A path diagram showing relationships between variables Anthropomorphic Design, Perceived Anthropomorphism, Cognitive Trust, Aff ective Trust, and Risk Perception, with moderating variables Domain Knowledge and demographic factors (Age, Gender, Education, Income). Arrows labeled H1-H4 with sub-labels (H2a, H2b, H3a, H3b, H4a, H4b) show hypothesized relationships between the constructs. Table 1: Summary of hypotheses. 

Hypothesis Description 

H1 Perceived Anthropomorphism of chatbots will a ff ect Risk Perception (non-directional). H2 Cognitive Trust will mediate the e ff ect that anthropomorphism has on Risk Perception. H2A Anthropomorphism will increase Cognitive Trust. H2B Cognitive Trust will decrease Risk Perception. H3 Aff ective Trust will mediate the e ff ect that anthropomorphism has on Risk Perception. H3A Anthropomorphism will increase A ff ective Trust. H3B Aff ective Trust will a ff ect Risk Perception (non-directional). H4 Domain Knowledge will increase Risk Perception. H4a Domain Knowledge moderates the e ff ect that anthropomorphism has on Cognitive Trust. H4b Domain Knowledge moderates the e ff ect that anthropomorphism has on A ff ective Trust. 

Anthropomorphic Design (AD) : An 8-level design borrowed from Bao et al. [6] in which anthropomorphism was manipulated over 3 di ff erent cues (name, avatar, and communication style). 

Perceived Anthropomorphism (PA) : This is our main predictor. For this measure, we used the popu-lar Godspeed questionnaire developed by Bartneck et al. [7] on a 4-item 7-point Likert scale. Thus, anthropomor-phism is the perception of how human-like the system feels and looks. 

Cognitive Trust (CT) : A five -item sub-scale cap-turing the cognitive aspect of trust – see Johnson and Grayson [26] . This is defined as the cognitive route to trust related to the perceived credibility and competence of the AI system. 

Aff ective Trust (AT) : A five -item sub-scale capturing the a ff ective aspect of trust – see Johnson and Grayson [26] . This is defined as the a ff ective (emotional) route to trust related to the perceived warmth and goodwill of the AI system. 

Domain Knowledge (DK) : Participants rated their perceived knowledge of financial markets and their fa-miliarity with financial investments on a 7 - point Likert item – i.e., self-reported domain knowledge [ 16 ]. The use of self-reported domain knowledge is not uncommon in behavioral research – for a full discussion see Flynn and Goldsmith [19] , Brucks [15] , Chen et al. [16] . Our model targets perception-driven outcomes – i.e., per-ceived anthropomorphism, trust, and risk perception; Thus, a self-assessed (perceived) level of domain knowl-edge is the construct that best aligns with this paradigm. 

Risk Perception (RP) : Assessed using a 7-point Lik-ert item capturing the perceived risk of the recommended investment. Thus, RP is a subjective judgment of the 6potential negative consequences of relying on AI ad-vice. Holzmeister et al. [24] used the same scale but in a di ff erent scenario. In our study, risk perception is the participant’s subjective judgment of how risky it would be to follow the investment recommendation provided by the AI advisor. Implicitly, this action could lead to severe negative consequences (e.g., money loss). Our focus was on the action the system recommends, not on how the presentation of statistical information a ff ects this perception, as found in Holzmeister et al. [24] . Thus, the recommendation was presented in-text by the AI system, along with the justification for such a recommendation. We also measured demographics such as Age, Gender, Education, and Income as control variables. For the variables’ description and corresponding references, see Table 2. 

4. Method 

The scenario of our experiment was a financial in-vestment scenario that was previously used in Bao et al. [6] , and for assessing risk perception, we borrowed the measurement protocol from Holzmeister et al. [24] . In the present study, users interacted with an AI agent to seek financial advice. In this scenario, the implicit con-sequence for the user is that if such a user invests money in the products recommended by the agent, they might gain or lose money. Thus, some level of risk is inherent in the recommendation given by the AI. From Bao et al. [6] , we borrowed the financial scenario, the procedure, and the design of the interface – i.e., the three types of anthropomorphic cues which Bao et al. developed based on previous theories [ 53 ] – whereas to measure risk per-ception we adopted a single-item test – see Holzmeister et al. [24]. We implemented a simulated AI agent that resembled a financial advisor. The chatbot’s level of anthropomor-phism was manipulated by copying the design used in previous research [ 54 , 6]. Such a design framework was borrowed from the heuristic-systematic model (HSM) found in Bao et al. [6] , where anthropomorphic design el-ements include identity cues (e.g., chatbot names signal-ing gender), visual cues (e.g., avatars showing the visual appearance of the AI agent), and communicative cues (speech-related elements, both verbal and non-verbal) that make the chatbot appear friendly, warm, and empa-thetic. The chatbot interface and the eight manipulations pro-posed in Bao et al. [6] were also used in subsequent research – e.g., Sun et al. [61] , and are fully reported in Section 4.1. This design was chosen as multiple stud-ies [ 6, 61 ] confirmed its direct e ff ect on Perceived An-thropomorphism (PA), the protagonist of this study (i.e., the predictor of trust and risk perception). 

4.1. Chatbot Design and Experimental Conditions 

The anthropomorphic design in our study varies three cues – visual, identity, and communicative – within a unified framework [ 6] which is, in turn, an extension of Seeger and Janowski [53] ’s work. Heuristic pro-cessing relies on simple, experience-based signals; here, those signals are identity cues (e.g., names that imply gender vs. names that imply a technological artifact) and visual cues (e.g., avatars that make the agent look more human vs. more machine-like). These two categories of cues work on low-level perception and shape how users “feel” about the chatbot (whether it feels human-like or machine-like). Systematic processing, by contrast, en-gages with communicative cues – the chatbot’s verbal style (i.e., the use of a friendly tone and small talk typ-ical of human-to-human communication vs. the use of an analytical and distant language style communicat-ing instructions and procedures typical of machine talk). Non-verbal cues also belong to this processing route. These consist of the manipulation of more subtle ele-ments – e.g., waiting time when the machine is thinking, signaled by thinking dots on the screen. Operationally, we implemented a 2 ×2×2 design: Vi-sual cue (avatar): computer image vs. human photo; Identity cue (name): “bot#156” vs. “David”; Commu-nicative cue (tone and non-verbal elements): machine-vs. human-style communication as per Bao et al. [6] .This yields eight anthropomorphism conditions. The two extremes – fully machine-like and fully human-like, are illustrated in Figure 2. Such a manipulation replicates previous research [ 53 , 6, 61 ] and its e ff ect on the actual perception of anthropomorphism is rigorously assessed in Section 5.1, which reports the manipulation check. 

4.2. Experimental Design 

We conducted an independent between-subject design online experiment. The independent variable (IV) was Anthropomorphic Design with eight levels. The depen-dent variable (DV) was Perceived Anthropomorphism (PA), measured using the Godspeed questionnaire [ 7 ]. Then, PA was used as the main predictor of Risk Percep-tion [ 24 ] via Trust, measured using the CATQ [ 26 ], mod-erated by Domain Knowledge [ 16 ] in both the regression and structural equation modeling – see the theoretical framework in Section 3. 7Table 2: Variables descriptions, references, and uses in questionnaire. 

Variable Name Questionnaire name Reference Use 

Anthropomorphic Design (Exp. manipulation) Bao et al. [6] Antecedent Perceived Anthropomorphism Godspeed Bartneck et al. [7] Predictor Cognitive Trust CATQ Johnson and Grayson [26] Mediator Aff ective Trust CATQ Johnson and Grayson [26] Mediator Domain Knowledge Single-item Domain Knowledge Chen et al. [16] Moderator Risk Perception Single-item Risk Perception Holzmeister et al. [24] Response 

4.3. Participants 

Participants (Ps) were recruited via Prolific in ex-change for a monetary reward. In the platform, we specified two eligibility criteria, such as English as the first language and a minimum education level of a high school diploma. To mitigate gender bias, the sampling was evenly split, with 50% male and 50% female. Ps with incomplete submissions were deleted. A total of 1430 people completed the study. After performing attention checks, 1256 Ps were used for fur-ther analysis (50.4% female; mean age =38.1 years, SD 

= 12.9). On average, participants took 43 minutes (SD 

= 10.57) to complete the experiment. More than 90% of the participants were from the US. Regarding educa-tion level, 33% of Ps did not complete any university degree, 41% held a bachelor’s degree, and the remaining completed a postgraduate degree. 

4.4. Procedure 

The study was conducted on a custom web platform hosting an AI financial-advisor chatbot. Participants ac-cessed the study via a link, reviewed the purpose of the research, and provided informed consent. They then completed a brief questionnaire collecting demographics (age, gender, education, annual income) and background information on financial knowledge and investment ex-perience. Participants were randomly assigned to one of eight anthropomorphic-design conditions [ 6 ]. The interface varied along three cues – avatar (computer image vs. hu-man photo), identity (bot-like code vs. human name), and communicative cues (machine-like vs. human-like verbal and non-verbal communication). The investment scenario and interaction flow followed the setup de-scribed in Bao et al. [6]. To standardize the human-AI exchange, the interac-tion was guided. An instruction pane introduced the task (for example, “Ask the advisor how to invest your savings”), and a suggestion window beside the chat of-fered step-by-step prompts to help participants formulate their request. Within their assigned condition, partici-pants interacted with the chatbot, which then produced a concrete investment recommendation. Immediately after the interaction, participants com-pleted the study measures using 7-point Likert scales. These included Perceived Anthropomorphism of the chatbot (Godspeed items), Cognitive Trust and A ff ec-tive Trust toward the advisor [ 26 ], self-assessed domain knowledge about financial products and investing [ 16 ], and perceived risk of following the AI’s recommenda-tion [ 24 ] – see Section 3.2. All responses were recorded electronically on the platform, and participants were de-briefed at the end of the session. 

5. Results 

Descriptive statistics and correlations are reported in Table 3. In the table, N is the variable code number. The table reports the means and standard deviations for each variable, along with the Pearson correlation coe ffi cients between variables. 

5.1. Testing the Design Manipulation 

To test whether the designs adopted a ff ected the par-ticipants’ Perceived Anthropomorphism, the actual pre-dictor in our model, measured using the Godspeed ques-tionnaire developed by Bartneck et al. [ 7 ] – see Figure 1, we conducted ANOVA and Post Hoc testing. A one-way ANOVA shows that the Anthropomorphic Design adopted had a significant e ff ect on Perceived An-thropomorphism – F(7, 1248) = 2.8912, p = 0.005, η2 =

0.016. This confirms that the 8-level design functions as an antecedent of Perceived Anthropomorphism, in line with previous results [ 6 ] – i.e., anthropomorphic design manipulation directly a ff ects Perceived Anthropomor-phism. Tukey HSD (alpha = .05) revealed that the most human-like bundle (human photo + human name +

8Figure 2: Two side-by-side chatbot interface screenshots showing contrasting designs. The left side shows a machine-like design with bot#15789 identifier in place of the agent name, the image of a PC in place of a human avatar, and the use of a distant and procedural-style language to communicate with the user. The right side shows the human-like design with the name of the agent (David), a human avatar photo, and anthropomorphic communication. Both show similar conversation flow about financial investment advice with user responses in green bubbles. 

human-like communication) exceeded a mix design (hu-man photo + human name + machine-like communi-cation) – ∆ = 0.650, p-adj = .010, Cohen’s d = 0.405 (moderate), and the fully machine-like design (machine photo + machine name + machine-like communication – 

∆ = 0.572, p-adj = .026, Cohen’s d = 0.350 (moderate). Other pairwise di ff erences were non-significant. After testing marginal contrasts of the design (flipping one cue while averaging over the other two) with Welch t-tests and Holm correction, we found the results displayed in Table 4, confirming the stability of our manipulation. In summary, the 8-level design does alter Perceived Anthropomorphism overall, and the post-hoc pattern pin-points communicative cues as the key lever: making the AI agent write in a human-like manner boosts Perceived Anthropomorphism. Using an avatar (a human photo) contributes a smaller, borderline increase, whereas using a human name (vs a bot code) is inert on its own. The highest Perceived Anthropomorphism is achieved by the fully human-like condition (human photo + human name 

+ human-like communication), which significantly out-performs comparable variants with machine-like commu-nication style, underscoring that tone carries the heaviest weight among the three cues. Once again, these results are in line with previous research showing a similar e ff ect of AI design on Perceived Anthropomorphism [6]. 

5.2. Anthropomorphic Design on Trust 

We also performed a supplementary cue-combination analysis on the mediator Trust. Although the 2 ×2×2anthropomorphic design reliably shifted Perceived An-thropomorphism (PA), the same cue combinations did not produce direct di ff erences in trust. A factorial cue model (Visual x Identity x Communication) predicting Cognitive Trust (CT) and A ff ective Trust (AT) showed no significant main e ff ects or interactions on either trust dimension (CT: all ps ≥.071; AT: all ps ≥.082), and treating the manipulation as an 8-level condition factor likewise yielded non-significant omnibus e ff ects (CT: F(7,1248) =0.78, p = .604; AT: F(7,1248) =1.25, p =

.275). Conversely, Section 5.3 below shows that Per-ceived Anthropomorphism strongly predicts trust in the main model. This pattern suggests that the experimen-tal cues primarily operate by shaping participants’ psy-chological interpretation of the agent’s human-likeness (PA), rather than directly shifting trust as an outcome on their own. Previous research has shown that people vary significantly in their baseline tendency to anthro-pomorphize non-human entities, with these individual 9Table 3: Summary statistics and correlations. 

# N Variable mean std 1 2 3 4 5

# 1 Cognitive Trust 4.16 0.88 12 Aff ective Trust 4.09 1.15 0.45 13 Perceived Anthropomorphism 3.85 1.64 0.39 0.59 14 Risk Perception 3.57 1.59 -0.12 0.08 0.10 15 Domain Knowledge 3.96 1.67 0.11 0.33 0.26 0.17 1

> Table 4: Marginal contrasts for anthropomorphic design cues on Perceived Anthropomorphism.

Cue Levels (A - B) Mean A Mean B ∆ t p Eff ect size 

Communication human-like vs machine-like 3.996 3.706 0.290 3.141 .005 0.177 / 0.177 Visual human photo vs computer image 3.953 3.749 0.204 2.296 .050 0.127 / 0.126 Identity human name vs bot code 3.859 3.852 0.007 0.083 .934 0.005 / 0.005 

di ff erences linked to personality, cognitive styles, de-mographic factors, and even neural structure, implying that di ff erent users respond very di ff erently to the same anthropomorphic cues [ 66 , 32 ]. In our analysis, we treat Anthropomorphic Design as the cause of Perceived An-thropomorphism after verifying its manipulation (i.e., the results in Section 5.1 serve as manipulation checks). Then, we use Perceived Anthropomorphism as the main predictor in the conditional process model because it captures the e ff ective dose of anthropomorphism experi-enced by participants—integrating the manipulated cues with individual di ff erences in how those cues are per-ceived; whereas the design conditions are a more dis-tal manipulation whose downstream e ff ects on trust are largely indirect via Perceived Anthropomorphism. 

5.3. Perceived Anthropomorphism on Risk Perception Via Trust 

In the following analyses, we model Perceived An-thropomorphism as the proximal psychological driver of Risk Perception via Trust. The regression analysis is shown in Table 5 (Hierar-chical OLS for RP) and Table 7 (Mediator Models). See also Equation 1, which describes the regression model. 

RP i = β0 + β1Age i + β2Gender i + β3Education i

+ β4Income i + β5PA i + β6CT i + β7AT i

+ β8DK i + β9PA i × DK i + ϵi

(1) The base model (Model 0) shows that Age, gender, education, and income (included as controls) have a mod-est e ff ect ( R2 = 0.023) and explain only a small portion of variance in RP. Adding Perceived Anthropomorphism (PA) in Model 1 improves model fit ( R2 = .030) and supports H1: higher Perceived Anthropomorphism is associated with higher Risk Perception. The mediation models then examine how Cognitive Trust (CT) and Af-fective Trust (AT) transmit the e ff ect of PA on RP, and how Domain Knowledge (DK) moderates these links. For completeness, we also report the distribution of aff ective trust (AT) across di ff erent levels of Perceived Anthropomorphism (PA) in Appendix A. Table 6 summarizes the core hypothesis tests across models. Taken together, these results indicate that Perceived Anthropomorphism has a small positive direct associ-ation with Risk Perception (H1), but also exerts an in-direct, risk-reducing e ff ect via Cognitive Trust: higher Perceived Anthropomorphism increases Cognitive Trust (H2A), and in turn, higher Cognitive Trust predicts lower Risk Perception (H2B). Perceived Anthropomorphism likewise increases A ff ective Trust (H3A), yet A ff ective Trust shows a small positive association with Risk Per-ception once Perceived Anthropomorphism and Cogni-tive Trust are controlled (H3B), suggesting that A ff ective Trust follows a di ff erent route from Cognitive Trust. Fi-nally, Domain Knowledge both raises Risk Perception directly (H4) and weakens the impact of Perceived An-thropomorphism on Cognitive Trust and A ff ective Trust (H4a, H4b): knowledgeable participants are less swayed by anthropomorphic cues in terms of both competence-related and A ff ective Trust. We further examined Domain Knowledge as a mod-erator using conditional analyses at three levels (low =

10 Table 5: Dependent variable = Risk Perception (Hierarchical OLS Models). 

Variable Model 0 Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 

Intercept 3.307 ∗∗∗ 3.087 ∗∗∗ 4.204 ∗∗∗ 4.085 ∗∗∗ 3.909 ∗∗∗ 4.348 ∗∗∗ 

Age −0.003 −0.004 −0.004 −0.003 −0.003 −0.002 Gender −0.218 ∗ −0.213 ∗ −0.198 ∗ −0.184 ∗ −0.111 −0.107 Education 0.204 ∗∗∗ 0.177 ∗∗ 0.147 ∗∗ 0.129 ∗ 0.064 0.047 Income 0 0 0 0 0 0Perceived Anthropomorphism 0.084 ∗∗ 0.154 ∗∗∗ 0.120 ∗∗ 0.112 ∗∗ −0.021 Cognitive Trust −0.320 ∗∗∗ −0.359 ∗∗∗ −0.360 ∗∗∗ −0.354 ∗∗∗ 

Aff ective Trust 0.105 ∗ 0.075 0.080 Domain Knowledge 0.114 ∗∗∗ −0.010 PA ×DK 0.032 

R2 0.023 0.030 0.057 0.060 0.070 0.073 

Note. PA × DK = Interaction term between Perceived Anthropomorphism and Domain Knowledge; No star: Not significant ( p ≥ 0.05), * : p < 0.05, ** : p < 0.01, and *** : p < 0.001. mean −1 SD = 2.29; medium = 3.96; high = mean +1SD = 5.63). The indirect e ff ect via Cognitive Trust was nega-tive and significant at low Domain Knowledge ( b =

−0.093, 95% CI [ −0.128 , −0.059]), and it weakened (i.e., became less negative) but remained significant at high Domain Knowledge ( b = −0.060, 95% CI [−0.087 , −0.037]). The direct e ff ect of Perceived Anthro-pomorphism on Risk Perception increased with Domain Knowledge: at low DK the simple slope was 0.042 (95% CI [ −0.057 , 0.141], n.s.); at medium DK it was 0.101 (95% CI [0 .029 , 0.174], p = .0065); and at high DK it was 0.161 (95% CI [0 .070 , 0.248], p < . 001). A simple-slopes plot (Figure 3) illustrates the progressively steeper Perceived Anthropomorphism → Risk Perception slope as Domain Knowledge rises. Steeper lines indicate that perceived anthropomorphism has a stronger positive as-sociation with risk perception at that domain-knowledge level; the increasing steepness from Low to High DK visualizes the positive PA × DK interaction. Moderated-mediation analyses confirmed that the CT-mediated pathway depends on DK: the index of moder-ated mediation (CT path) was positive and significant (index = 0.0096, 95% CI [0 .0034 , 0.0167]), indicating that the (negative) indirect e ff ect via CT attenuates as DK increases. For completeness, Figure 4 visualises raw Risk Per-ception responses (RP) as a function of Perceived An-thropomorphism (PA), stratified by Domain Knowledge (DK). PA is grouped into tertiles (low, medium, and high PA) to provide an interpretable, distribution-level view of the data; within each PA group, the lines represent ob-served mean RP for participants with low, medium, and high DK (tertiles), with error bars indicating the standard errors, and the jittered points showing individual obser-vations. The plot indicates that Risk Perception varies systematically across Perceived Anthropomorphism lev-els and that this pattern di ff ers by Domain Knowledge: the separation between DK groups becomes more pro-nounced as PA increases, consistent with a PA × DK in-teraction in which higher-knowledge participants appear more sensitive to variations in perceived anthropomor-phism when judging investment risk. Importantly, this figure complements the inferential models by showing the empirical variability and dispersion underlying the moderation results, rather than relying solely on model-predicted simple slopes. To further check the robustness of our model and ex-plore other potential interactions between variables, we additionally tested PA ×CT and PA ×AT interactions pre-dicting RP. Both were marginal and did not alter the main mediation conclusions. This analysis can be found in Appendix B. In summary, the regression analysis shows that Per-ceived Anthropomorphism (PA) directly raises Risk Per-ception (RP) (H1 supported) and indirectly lowers RP via Cognitive Trust (CT) (because PA increases CT and, in turn, CT reduces RP), creating opposing pathways (H2). PA also raises A ff ective Trust (AT), and AT (control-ling PA & CT) slightly raises RP (H3b), suggesting that Aff ective Trust may track warmth /liking without confer-ring a sense of safety. Domain Knowledge heightens Risk Perception overall (H4) and attenuates the impact of anthropomorphic cues on both Cognitive Trust and 11 Table 6: Summary of hypothesis tests from regression models. 

Hypothesis Path / Eff ect Model R2 b p Supported 

H1 PA → RP (direct) Model 1 .030 0.084 .0068 Yes H2A PA → CT CT M1 .160 0.218 <.001 Yes H2B CT → RP (controlling PA) Model 2 .057 −0.320 <.001 Yes H3A PA → AT AT M1 .367 0.401 <.001 Yes H3B AT → RP (controlling PA & CT) Model 3 .060 0.105 .048 Yes H4 DK → RP Model 4 .070 0.114 <.001 Yes H4a PA ×DK → CT CT M3 .168 −0.0228 .0086 Yes H4b PA ×DK → AT AT M3 .390 −0.0253 .0071 Yes 

Note. PA = Perceived Anthropomorphism; CT = Cognitive Trust; AT = Aff ective Trust; DK = Domain Knowledge; RP = Risk Perception; PA ×DK = interaction term between Perceived Anthropomorphism and Domain Knowledge; b =

unstandardized regression coe ffi cient; R2 = proportion of variance in the dependent variable explained by the model. (Base Model 0 with controls only: R2 = .023, not shown in table.) 

> Table 7: Mediator models for Cognitive and A ff ective Trust.

DV: Cognitive Trust DV: A ff ective Trust 

Variable CT M0 CT M1 CT M2 CT M3 AT M0 AT M1 AT M2 AT M3 

Intercept 4.055*** 3.486*** 3.407*** 3.068*** 3.457*** 2.412*** 2.161*** 1.784*** Age 0.003 0 0 0 0.002 -0.004 -0.003 -0.004* Gender 0.036 0.048 0.072 0.069 -0.129* -0.108* -0.032 -0.035 Edu -0.024 -0.095** -0.116*** -0.105*** 0.264*** 0.134*** 0.065 0.078* Income 0 0 0 0 0.0** 0.0** 0 0Perceived Anthro. 0.218*** 0.211*** 0.303*** 0.401*** 0.380*** 0.482*** Domain Knowledge 0.035* 0.123** 0.112*** 0.210*** PA ×DK -0.023** -0.025** 

R2 0.004 0.160 0.163 0.168 0.058 0.367 0.386 0.390 

Note. PA ×DK = Interaction term between Perceived Anthropomorphism and Domain Knowledge; No star: Not significant ( p ≥ 0.05), * : p < 0.05, ** : p < 0.01, and *** : p < 0.001. Aff ective Trust (H4a /H4b). 

5.4. SEM Analysis 

We also performed structural equation modelling (SEM). Figure 5 shows these results with the coef-ficients for the significant paths. In the SEM, Per-ceived Anthropomorphism (PA) strongly predicted both forms of trust: AT ( β = 0.653 , p < .001) and CT (β = 0.586 , p < . 001). Domain Knowledge (DK) also positively predicted trust—AT ( β = 0.308 , p < . 001) and CT ( β = 0.214 , p = .002)—but attenuated the im-pact of PA on both trusts, as indicated by significant PA ×DK interactions for AT ( β = −0.187 , p = .034) and CT ( β = −0.330 , p = .002). Downstream, CT was negatively associated with Risk Perception (RP) (β = −0.201 , p < . 001), whereas the direct PA →RP and AT →RP paths were not significant in this SEM. We did observe a small positive PA ×DK →RP path (β = 0.243 , p = .049), suggesting that higher DK can amplify the (direct) association between PA and Risk Perception. Model fit (variance explained) was modest for RP ( R2 = .071) and larger for the trust mediators (R2 

> AT

= .384; R2 

> CT

= .159), consistent with a mechanism in which anthropomorphic cues primarily shape trust (es-pecially A ff ective Trust), while Cognitive Trust in turn reduces Risk Perception. For the full SEM analysis with all the paths and their coe ffi cients, see Section 5.4.1. 

5.4.1. Structural Equation Model Path Analysis Results 

Here, we report the SEM analysis with all the paths, the coe ffi cients, p-values, and significance levels. Table 8 presents the complete results of the structural equation 12 Figure 3: A line graph showing three upward-sloping lines representing the relationship between Perceived Anthropomorphism on the x-axis and Predicted Risk Perception on the y-axis. The yellow line shows low Domain Knowledge (2.29), the blue line shows medium Domain Knowledge (3.96), and the green line shows high Domain Knowledge (5.63). The green line has the steepest slope, indicating a stronger relationship at high Domain Knowledge. 

model path analysis. In summary, from the analysis we observed that: 

• Perceived Anthropomorphism positively and signif-icantly a ff ects Cognitive Trust (supports H2A). 

• Cognitive Trust negatively and significantly a ff ects Risk Perception (this supports H2B; mediation via Cognitive Trust). 

• Perceived Anthropomorphism positively and signif-icantly a ff ects A ff ective Trust (supports H3A). 

• Aff ective Trust positively and significantly a ff ects RP, although the e ff ect is small (supports H3B, di-rection positive). 

• Perceived Anthropomorphism positively and sig-nificantly a ff ects Risk Perception, and this e ff ect is also small (supports H1 direct). 

• Domain Knowledge positively and significantly af-fects Risk Perception (supports H4). 

• The interaction Perceived Anthropomorphism × Do-main Knowledge a ff ects both Cognitive Trust and Aff ective Trust negatively and significantly (sup-ports H4a, H4b: DK attenuates PA’s e ff ect on both trusts). 

5.5. Robustness Checks 

Multicollinearity is not a substantive concern in our models. The only structurally collinear term is the inter-action Perceived Anthropomorphism × Domain Knowl-edge, which (by construction) correlates with its compo-nents. Nevertheless, to further test the robustness of our results, we performed a multicollinearity test. As stan-dard practice, we also mean-centered Perceived Anthro-pomorphism and Domain Knowledge before forming the interaction. 

5.5.1. Multicollinearity test 

We assessed multicollinearity using variance inflation factors (VIFs) and condition-index diagnostics across all models. In the risk-perception equation, uncentered pre-dictors produced the following VIFs: Perceived Anthro-pomorphism = 7.29, Cognitive Trust = 1.31, A ff ective Trust = 1.79, Domain Knowledge = 6.66, Interaction 

= 14.68. After mean-centering, Perceived Anthropo-morphism and Domain Knowledge and re-forming the interaction, VIFs dropped to: centered Perceived Anthro-pomorphism = 1.60, Cognitive Trust = 1.31, A ff ective Trust = 1.79, centered Domain Knowledge = 1.14, cen-tered Interaction = 1.02. The corresponding condition-index spectrum for the centered model was 1.00, 1.41, 1.45, 1.58, 1.90, 2.32. 13 Table 8: SEM Path Analysis Results: Standardized Coe ffi cients and Significance Tests. 

# Dependent Variable Independent Variable Std. Coe ff . p-value Sig. 

# Aff ective Trust Domain Knowledge 0.304 0.000 *** Education 0.057 0.025 *Gender -0.015 0.500 Perceived Anthropomorphism 0.686 0.000 *** PA ×DK -0.240 0.007 ** Age -0.045 0.037 *Income 0.035 0.151 Cognitive Trust Domain Knowledge 0.234 0.001 ** Education -0.099 0.001 *** Gender 0.039 0.136 Perceived Anthropomorphism 0.565 0.000 *** PA ×DK -0.282 0.009 ** Age -0.006 0.828 Income -0.012 0.484 Risk Perception Aff ective Trust 0.058 0.139 Cognitive Trust -0.195 0.000 *** Domain Knowledge -0.011 0.894 Education 0.025 0.423 Gender -0.034 0.235 Perceived Anthropomorphism -0.021 0.807 PA ×DK 0.218 0.084 Age -0.019 0.491 Income 0.023 0.500                 

> Note. PA ×DK =Interaction term between Perceived Anthropomorphism and Domain Knowledge; No star: Not significant ( p≥0.05), * : p<0.05, ** : p<0.01, and *** : p<0.001. 14 Figure 4: PA is discretised into tertiles (Low, Medium, and High PA) and plotted on the x-axis. Lines show observed mean RP within each PA group for low, medium, and high DK (tertiles), with standard error bars. Light points represent raw participant responses (jittered for visibility). This figure visualises the underlying observed data pattern used to interpret the PA ×DK moderation, rather than model-predicted slopes.

For the mediator specifications (Cognitive Trust and Aff ective Trust each regressed on Perceived Anthropo-morphism, Domain Knowledge, and their interaction), uncentered VIFs were: Perceived Anthropomorphism =

6.43, Domain Knowledge = 6.49, Interaction = 14.53; after centering: centered Perceived Anthropomorphism 

= 1.07, centered Domain Knowledge = 1.08, centered Interaction = 1.01. The condition-index spectrum for the centered mediator models was 1.00, 1.14, 1.16, 1.32. These diagnostics show that the apparent inflation is the expected artifact of product terms before centering and that centering removes nonessential collinearity to benign levels – see Aiken et al. [2]. 

5.5.2. Refitting with centered predictors 

Using the centered specification from the preceding subsection, we refit the models and report only substan-tive e ff ects. In the ordinary least squares model for Risk Perception, adding Perceived Anthropomorphism to Do-main Knowledge yielded a positive Perceived Anthro-pomorphism → Risk Perception e ff ect (b = 0.063, SE 

= 0.031, p = .042). With mediators included, Cogni-tive Trust was negative and reliable (b = -0.230, SE =

0.030, p < . 001), A ff ective Trust was small positive (b 

= 0.092, SE = 0.046, p = .045), and Domain Knowledge remained positive (b = 0.134, SE = 0.028, p < . 001); the centered interaction between Perceived Anthropomor-phism and Domain Knowledge was modest (b = 0.073, SE = 0.039, p = .056; model R-sq = .071). Standardized path models reproduced these patterns: Perceived An-thropomorphism → Aff ective Trust (b = 0.596, p < . 001) and Perceived Anthropomorphism → Cognitive Trust (b 

= 0.364, p < . 001) were positive; Domain Knowledge 

→ Aff ective Trust (b = 0.325, p < . 001) and Domain Knowledge → Cognitive Trust (b = 0.210, p < . 001) were positive; the interaction between Perceived An-thropomorphism and Domain Knowledge attenuated the eff ects on A ff ective Trust (b = -0.180, p < . 001) and Cognitive Trust (b = -0.133, p < . 001). For Risk Percep-tion, Cognitive Trust was negative (b = -0.239, p < . 001), Aff ective Trust was small positive (b = 0.091, p = .004), the interaction e ff ect on Risk Perception was modest (b 

= 0.064, p = .049), and the direct e ff ect of Perceived An-thropomorphism on Risk Perception was non-significant once mediators were included (b = 0.025, p = .346) – collinearity diagnostics for the centered specification are provided in the previous subsection. After diagnosing and addressing multicollinearity (mean-centering Perceived Anthropomorphism and Do-main Knowledge before forming their interaction), all coe ffi cients and inference were stable. The ordinary least squares models with robust errors and the standardized, observed-variable SEM converged on the same pattern: Perceived Anthropomorphism increases both A ff ective Trust (strongly) and Cognitive Trust (moderately); Do-main Knowledge also increases both trusts, while the Perceived Anthropomorphism × Domain Knowledge in-teraction attenuates these trust gains. Downstream, Cog-nitive Trust reliably reduces Risk Perception, A ff ective Trust exerts a small positive e ff ect on Risk Perception, 15 Figure 5: Path Diagram for Structural Equation Model. Only significant coe ffi cients (and paths) are represented. The variables are Perceived Anthropomorphism, Cognitive Trust, A ff ective Trust, Domain Knowledge, Risk Perception; and PA ×DK = interaction term between Perceived Anthropomorphism and Domain Knowledge. 

and the direct path from Perceived Anthropomorphism to Risk Perception becomes non-significant once me-diators are included [ 10 ]. In short, after centering and formal collinearity checks, the regression modeling and SEM results remain valid, and our conditional process (moderated-mediation) interpretation holds. 

6. Discussion 

Our study set out to explain how Perceived Anthropo-morphism predicts Risk Perception through two forms of trust—Cognitive Trust and A ff ective Trust—and how Domain Knowledge conditions these links. Most of the prior research has studied the e ff ect of anthropomor-phism on trust or on risk perception. These two mental processes are seldom discussed together in the area of AI. Moreover, moderation by expertise is under-examined, and evidence from high-stakes decision support (e.g., finance) remains limited. We address these gaps by (i) treating anthropomorphic design as the antecedent of anthropomorphism – e.g., Bartneck et al. [7] , Bao et al. [6] , Sun et al. [61] . Thus, our goal is not to at-tribute e ff ects to specific cues, but to understand how users’ experienced human-likeness relates to trust and risk judgments. This strategy limits the drawbacks and interferences produced by certain design styles [ 4, 17 ]and individual di ff erences in cue responses [ 66 , 32 ]. In this work, we modelled two trust routes [ 26 ] between anthropomorphism and Risk Perception, testing Domain Knowledge as a moderator in a large sample to account for the discrepancies found in the literature (see sec-tion 2). We posited a direct e ff ect of anthropomorphism on Risk Perception without specifying direction, given mixed prior findings [ 28 , 4 ]. The result of the regression modelling suggests that anthropomorphism positively predicted Risk Perception, but in the observed-variable SEM (excluding controls), this direct path was not re-tained once mediators entered—indicating that anthro-pomorphism influence is largely indirect, via trust, when the full network is modeled. Crucially, Domain Knowl-edge conditions this relation: higher expertise steepens the e ff ect that anthropomorphism has on Risk Perception. The mediated indirect e ff ect of anthropomorphism on Risk Perception via Cognitive Trust was more negative at low Domain Knowledge compared to high Domain Knowledge. Moreover, the risk-reducing pathway via Cognitive Trust attenuates as Domain Knowledge in-creases. In short, anthropomorphism reduces Risk Per-ception via CT, especially among less knowledgeable users. Moreover, the e ff ect of A ff ective Trust on Risk Perception was positive, but small. In the reduced SEM, it was not retained once all paths /interactions were es-timated. Overall, after accounting for Cognitive Trust, greater A ff ective Trust does not reliably lower RP and can be slightly risk-raising (although this latter e ff ect was not significant)—consistent with the idea that warmth without competence may not assure safety in high-stakes 16 advice. Finally, Domain Knowledge does not appear to directly predict Risk Perception once mediators and in-teractions were included; instead, its influence emerged indirectly and via moderation. The results show that expert users are less swayed (both cognitively and e ff ec-tively) by anthropomorphic cues. Furthermore, we found a steeper e ff ect of anthropomorphism on Risk Perception for users with higher knowledge of finance. Although the results of our analyses are robust, it is worth noting that they suggest but do not prove that trust, per se, reduces risk perception. However, at the very least, these results show that trust alters how users subjectively appraise the potential consequences of AI advice. In summary, in our theoretical model and results, an-thropomorphism shifts both competence inferences and perceived warmth. In high-risk contexts, these routes appear to push Risk Perception in opposite directions: competence dampens it, whereas warmth—controlling for competence—need not. Our results fit this dual-route account and clarify the role of expertise. To conclude, anthropomorphism reduces risk percep-tion via trust, so that users may feel safer with an AI that is actually capable of producing severe factual errors. This mismatch of perceived safety and actual risk echoes the recent findings on users overtrusting AI-generated content and the propagation of epistemic error [ 31 , 55 ]. Our empirical evidence suggests that anthropomorphism is not just a fun or engagement-boosting feature. It ac-tually shapes risk perception via trust. This supports a more cautious design proposal for AI system interfaces in high-risk tasks – such systems should use anthropo-morphic AI responsibly, attenuating the likelihood of users accepting hallucinated or incorrect outputs without scrutiny. 

6.1. Theoretical Contribution 

Our model reconciles an apparent contradiction in the literature: anthropomorphism can increase trust and yet be associated with higher Risk Perception in high-stakes contexts. We find two concurrent mechanisms that were, to our knowledge, unexplored in the research on anthropomorphic AI. Anthropomorphism increases both dimensions of trust. Then, the cognitive route (com-petence) yields a risk-reducing indirect e ff ect, stronger for laypeople. This comes as no surprise. Slovic’s re-search and the psychometric paradigm of risk percep-tion anticipated such a relationship already four decades ago [ 57 , 58 ], although not in response to anthropomor-phism and not in the context of AI. Conversely, the a ff ec-tive route (warmth) seems to increase Risk Perception – this e ff ect was significant in the regression model but non-significant in the SEM model, and can have some expla-nation in the Uncanny Valley e ff ect and some Behavioral Economics theories. Under the Uncanny Valley lens [ 40 ], human-like language without fully human coherence can feel ”almost-but-not-quite” human, triggering unease. In high-stakes finance, that unease is read as higher uncer-tainty /risk, nudging Risk Perception upward. Under the behavioral economics lens [36], emotional tone can sig-nal lower rationality (more noise, bias, ”selling” rather than evidence). Users infer less calculative rigor, elevat-ing Risk Perception, especially when competence cues aren’t salient. These e ff ects are stronger in high-stakes contexts and among experts, who penalize warmth more and show a steeper PA →RP slope. Furthermore, the net eff ect of anthropomorphism depends on the user’s exper-tise: novices benefit more from the cognitive-mediated, risk-dampening route; experts show attenuated Cognitive Trust mediation and heightened sensitivity to risk as Per-ceived Anthropomorphism increases. In summary, we extend human–AI interaction models by incorporating a dual-process trust mechanism linking anthropomorphism to Risk Perception, moderated by expertise, and partially explain some mixed e ff ects reported in the literature – e.g., Kim and McGill [28], Aubel et al. [4]. 

6.2. Design Implications and Prescriptions 

Our results also have crucial implications for AI de-sign. First, the manipulation of language (tone and non-verbal cues), rather than the use of human names or avatars, seems to be the real driver of perceived anthro-pomorphism. Moreover, our results suggest that, in finan-cial decision support, designers could optimize anthro-pomorphism for Cognitive Trust: competence-forward cues (explanations, calibration, provenance, clarity) may lower Risk Perception. A ff ective styling alone (friendli-ness, small talk) is not su ffi cient and may even backfire once competence is accounted for, especially with expert users who may be less influenced by anthropomorphic cues and more sensitive to risk. Personalizing the degree and type of anthropomorphism to user expertise could be an option. The design takeaway is that competence-forward cues (transparency, rationale, uncertainty dis-closure) may help reduce Risk Perception, if this is a sought-after e ff ect; for example, such cues may be used for persuading users to take (hopefully ethical) actions. The enhancement of warmth in human-AI interaction (generally associated with high anthropomorphism) may be used sparingly and contextually so it complements, rather than dilutes, signals of analytical rigor. Given the growing pervasiveness of AI, these findings should inform the responsible design of such systems. To make these implications actionable, we pro-pose three concrete examples of system design that 17 could shape perceived risk and its interplay with per-ceived human-likeness, trust, and user expertise: (1) A competence-first frame: designers could pair every recommendation with brief calibration and provenance (what data, how validated, with what uncertainty) and a short, plain-language rationale. This may strengthen judgments of competence and reduce perceived risk when appropriate. (2) Gate tone by evidence and se-quence warmth after competence: friendly language ap-pears only alongside calibration or rationale, so warmth complements, rather than replaces, signals of analyti-cal rigor. (3) Adapt to user expertise: developers could collect a quick self-assessment of knowledge at onboard-ing, then present more formal, evidence-heavy messages to knowledgeable users and more guided, explanatory messages to novices; they could also add guardrails so that for knowledgeable users, the interface automatically down-weights warmth and surfaces uncertainty. When needed, a brief cost-of-being-wrong line could be in-cluded to prevent overconfidence. 

6.3. Limitations and Interpretation of Our Work 

Our work has four main limitations. First, we in-ferred mental processes by administering psychometric questionnaires. We do not actually know what is hap-pening inside people’s heads. Think-aloud protocols in laboratory settings may be needed for that. Moreover, our results are contingent on the context of financial in-vestments. Extending our model to other high-stakes domains (e.g., health) may test its generalizability. Addi-tionally, the trust scales were administered at the conclu-sion of the task. However, our measures may potentially reflect not only the experimental interaction but also par-ticipants’ prior experience with AI systems. As a result, we cannot attribute trust levels exclusively to the experi-mental manipulation. Nevertheless, any carryover from prior experience should be random with respect to our randomized conditions, and thus unlikely to bias con-dition comparisons. Future work may include a brief pre-task measure of the level of trust in AI to partial out pre-existing attitudes. Finally, domain knowledge was self-reported (i.e., measured via a questionnaire) to indi-cate a perceived level of financial knowledge. This self-reported measure of domain knowledge is common in behavioral research [ 16 , 19 , 15 ]. Moreover, it aligns with our perception-driven model: like perceived anthropo-morphism, trust, and perceived risk, it captures the user’s felt competence – the construct that actually guides judg-ment and behavior. Nevertheless, we acknowledge that this self-assessed construct may also reflect adjacent pro-cesses (e.g., self-confidence or familiarity) rather than objective expertise. To triangulate the construct, future work could compare finance professionals with lay par-ticipants. In our work, perceived anthropomorphism and risk perception were all measured as self-reported psycho-logical states within the same experimental session. Ac-cordingly, our use of trust as an intermediate variable may not be interpreted as establishing a temporal or causal sequence among these constructs. Rather, we em-ploy mediation-style analyses as an analytical decompo-sition to examine how di ff erent trust-related perceptions are statistically associated with variations in perceived risk under di ff ering levels of experienced anthropomor-phism. This approach is consistent with prior human-AI interaction research that models trust as a risk-relevant psychological state rather than a manipulable decision variable [ 35 , 21 ]. From this perspective, cognitive and af-fective trust may not “cause” changes in risk perception, but they certainly represent complementary dimensions of users’ evaluative stance toward the AI system that co-vary with how risky reliance on its advice is per-ceived to be. Our findings therefore speak to patterns of association and di ff erentiation among these subjective constructs, rather than to a mechanistic account of trust formation or causal risk reduction. We emphasize that longitudinal or experimental manipulation of trust itself may be required to make stronger claims about causal or-dering, which remains an important direction for future work. Despite these limitations, the present work makes a substantive contribution by empirically characterizing how perceived anthropomorphism, di ff erentiated trust dimensions, and subjective risk judgments systematically co-vary in a high-stakes AI decision-support context, thereby o ff ering robust, perception-level evidence that informs risk calibration and responsible design even in the absence of strong causal claims. 

7. Conclusion 

This study o ff ers an evidence-based account of how anthropomorphism in AI a ff ects risk perception via two trust pathways (cognitive and a ff ective), and how domain knowledge shapes these relationships. The findings indi-cate that design choices associated with human-likeness do not operate uniformly: cues that elevate warmth do not necessarily support competence, and users with greater self-assessed knowledge weight these signals dif-ferently. For practice, the implication is to prioritize cues that convey competence, clarity, and verifiability, while using warmth as a complementary element rather than the primary driver. For strategy, adapt presentation to user expertise: what is reassuring for novices may be 18 unpersuasive for experienced users, and vice-versa. For research, the model we estimated is a testable starting point, encouraging follow-up experiments with alterna-tive manipulations, objective knowledge measures, and deployment in other high-stakes domains. Progress in this space will come from transparent evidence displays, calibrated explanations, and user-contingent presenta-tion policies, not from a uniform increase in human-like styling. 

Appendix A. Distribution Visualizations Across Conditions 

Figure A.6 visualises the raw distribution of cogni-tive trust (CT) across three perceived anthropomorphism (PA) groups (tertiles) to make the underlying data and dispersion explicit. The boxplots and overlaid individ-ual observations show that CT tends to be higher when participants perceive the agent as more anthropomorphic (moving from low to high PA), while also revealing sub-stantial within-group variability. This pattern aligns with the inferential results in which PA positively predicts CT, and it clarifies that the relationship reflects a shift in the central tendency of CT rather than being driven by a small number of extreme observations. Figure A.7 presents the raw distribution of a ff ective trust (AT) across low, medium, and high PA tertiles, and it is used to show observed data rather than only model-predicted slopes. The distributional shift across PA groups indicates that participants who perceive the agent as more anthropomorphic also tend to report higher aff ective trust, consistent with the hypothesised e ff ect of PA on AT. At the same time, the visible spread of points within each group highlights meaningful heterogeneity in aff ective responses, suggesting that anthropomorphism perceptions increase AT on average while leaving room for individual di ff erences in how social cues translate into relational trust. 

Appendix B. Robustness Checks for Interaction Analyses 

The analysis below presents additional testing of the interaction between anthropomorphism and the two trust-based risks identified in the regression model. Along with the main interaction terms PA × DK present in the main model, we tested two interaction terms on trust – i.e., we extended the final risk-perception model (Eq. 1 

/ Model 5; controls + PA + CT + AT + DK + PA ×DK) by adding two additional interaction terms, PA ×CT and PA ×AT. The extended model was estimated using OLS with robust (HC3) standard errors. All continuous pre-dictors were mean-centered prior to computing product terms. 

Model specification. 

RP ∼ Controls + PA + CT + AT + DK 

+ (PA × DK) + (PA × CT) 

+ (PA × AT) .

(B.1) 

Model fit. Adding PA ×CT and PA ×AT produced a small improvement in model fit: the base model (Eq. 1 +

PA ×DK) explained R2 = 0.0731 of the variance in RP, whereas the extended model explained R2 = 0.0782 (∆R2 = 0.0051). The AIC also decreased, indicating a better-fitting specification. 

Key coe ffi cients. In the extended model, PA remained a positive predictor of RP ( b = 0.096, p = .0109), while CT remained a strong negative predictor ( b = −0.342, 

p < . 001). AT was not a significant predictor of RP ( b =

0.078, p = .148), whereas DK was positively associated with RP ( b = 0.114, p < . 001). The PA ×DK interaction was not significant ( b = 0.024, p = .202). The two reviewer-requested interactions were marginal: PA ×CT was negative ( b = −0.073, p = .062) and PA ×AT was positive ( b = 0.059, p = .060). 

Interpretation. Although these interaction e ff ects did not reach conventional significance levels, they exhibit a theoretically coherent pattern. The negative PA ×CT coe ffi cient suggests that higher cognitive trust attenuates the association between perceived anthropomorphism and risk perception (i.e., when the system is viewed as more competent /reliable, anthropomorphic perceptions contribute less to risk judgments). Conversely, the pos-itive PA ×AT coe ffi cient suggests that higher a ff ective trust may amplify the PA–RP association (i.e., relational trust may increase sensitivity to anthropomorphic im-pressions when evaluating risk in a high-stakes context). Importantly, including these interactions did not alter the core inferences of the primary mediation model. 

Multicollinearity. After mean-centering, collinearity re-mained low (maximum VIF ≈ 1.82), indicating that the interaction tests are unlikely to be artifacts of multi-collinearity. 

Interaction Plots. Figure B.8 and Figure B.9 visualise the interaction tests. Each plot shows the predicted rela-tionship between perceived anthropomorphism (PA) and risk perception (RP) at three levels of the trust moder-ator (low = −1 SD, mean, high = + 1 SD), holding all 19 Figure A.6: Observed cognitive trust (CT) distributions across perceived anthropomorphism (PA) groups. PA was discretised into tertiles (Low, Medium, and High PA). Boxplots show the median and interquartile range of CT within each PA group (whiskers indicate dispersion), and semi-transparent jittered points represent individual participant observations. This figure provides an observed-data view of how CT varies across levels of perceived anthropomorphism, including within-group variability. 

other predictors at their sample means. Shaded bands represent 95% confidence intervals. These visualisations indicate that the PA–RP association varies with trust: the slope becomes flatter as cognitive trust increases (consis-tent with the negative PA ×CT coe ffi cient), whereas the slope becomes steeper as a ff ective trust increases (con-sistent with the positive PA ×AT coe ffi cient). While the corresponding interaction terms are marginal, the plots provide an intuitive representation of their direction and magnitude. 

References 

[1] Adam, M., Toutaoui, J., Pfeu ff er, N., Hinz, O., 2019. Investment decisions with roboadvisors: The role of anthropomorphism and personalized anchors in recommendations, in: Proceedings of the 27th European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Association for Information Systems, Stockholm and Uppsala, Sweden. Research Papers. [2] Aiken, L.S., West, S.G., Reno, R.R., 1991. Multiple Regression: Testing and Interpreting Interactions. Sage, Newbury Park, CA. [3] Airenti, G., 2015. The cognitive bases of anthropomorphism: From relatedness to empathy. International Journal of Social Robotics 7, 117–127. doi: 10.1007/s12369-014-0263-x .[4] Aubel, M., Pikturniene, I., Joye, Y., 2022. Risk perception and risk behavior in response to service robot anthropomorphism in banking. Central European Management Journal 30, 26–42. [5] Baek, T.H., Kim, M., 2023. Ai robo-advisor anthropomor-phism: The impact of anthropomorphic appeals and regula-tory focus on investment behaviors. Journal of Business Re-search 164, 114039. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier. com/retrieve/pii/S0148296323003971 , doi: 10.1016/j. jbusres.2023.114039 .[6] Bao, Z., Chen, J., Luo, Y., Reani, M., 2022. Convincing or odd: Anthropomorphic design cues in chatbots, in: Proceedings of the Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems (PACIS 2022), Association for Information Systems, Taipei, Taiwan. [7] Bartneck, C., Kuli ´c, D., Croft, E., Zoghbi, S., 2009. Measurement instruments for the anthropomorphism, animacy, likeability, per-ceived intelligence, and perceived safety of robots. International Journal of Social Robotics 1, 71–81. doi: 10.1007/s12369-008-0001-3 .[8] Bayer, S., Gimpel, H., Markgraf, M., 2022. The role of domain expertise in trusting and following explainable ai decision support systems. Journal of Decision Systems 32, 110–138. [9] BBC News, 2016. China investigates search engine baidu after student’s death. URL: https://www.bbc.com/news/ business-36189252 . business. [10] Belsley, D.A., Kuh, E., Welsch, R.E., 2005. Regression Diag-nostics: Identifying Influential Data and Sources of Collinearity. John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ. [11] Bickmore, T., Cassell, J., 2005. Social dialogue with embodied conversational agents, in: Proceedings of the 2005 CHI Con-ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. pp. 143–150. doi: 10.1145/1054972.1054991 .[12] Boutet, I., LeBlanc, M., Chamberland, J.A., Collin, C.A., 2021. Emojis influence emotional communication, social attributions, and information processing. Computers in Human Behavior 119, 106722. [13] Brauner, P., Glawe, F., Liehner, G.L., Vervier, L., Ziefle, M., 2024. Misalignments in AI perception: Quantitative findings and visual mapping of how experts and the public di ff er in expectations and risks, benefits, and value judgments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01459. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2412.01459 . preprint. [14] Bruce, A., Nourbakhsh, I., Simmons, R., 2002. The role of expressiveness and attention in human-robot interaction, in: Pro-ceedings of the 2002 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA 2002), IEEE, Washington, DC, USA. pp. 

20 Figure A.7: Observed a ff ective trust (AT) distributions across perceived anthropomorphism (PA) groups. PA was discretised into tertiles (Low /Medium /High PA). Boxplots summarise the distribution of AT within each PA group, and semi-transparent jittered points show indi-vidual observations. This figure illustrates the observed association between perceived anthropomorphism and a ff ective trust, including the extent of variability within each PA level. 4138–4142. doi: 10.1109/ROBOT.2002.1014396 .[15] Brucks, M., 1985. The e ff ects of product class knowledge on information search behavior. Journal of consumer research 12, 1–16. [16] Chen, F., Lu, X., Wang, W., 2022. Informal financial educa-tion and consumer financial capability: The mediating role of financial knowledge. Frontiers in psychology 13, 1042085. [17] Cohn, M., Pushkarna, M., Olanubi, G.O., Moran, J.M., Padgett, D., Mengesha, Z., Heldreth, C., 2024. Believing anthropomor-phism: Examining the role of anthropomorphic cues on trust in large language models, in: Extended Abstracts of the CHI Con-ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. pp. 1–15. [18] Epley, N., Waytz, A., Cacioppo, J.T., 2007. On seeing human: A three-factor theory of anthropomorphism. Psychological Review 114, 864–886. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.114.4.864 .[19] Flynn, L.R., Goldsmith, R.E., 1999. A short, reliable measure of subjective knowledge. Journal of business research 46, 57–66. [20] Glikson, E., Cheshin, A., van Kleef, G.A., 2018. The dark side of a smiley: E ff ects of smiling emoticons on virtual first impressions. Social Psychological and Personality Science 9, 614–625. [21] Glikson, E., Woolley, A.W., 2020. Human trust in artificial intel-ligence: Review of empirical research. Academy of Management Annals 14, 627–660. doi: 10.5465/annals.2018.0057 .[22] Hasan, R., Ojala, A., Quach, S., Thaichon, P., Weaven, S., 2025. The dark side of AI anthropomorphism: A case of misplaced trustworthiness in service provisions, in: Proceedings of the 58th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, University of Hawai’i at Manoa, Honolulu, HI, USA. [23] Hildebrand, C., Bergner, A., 2021. Conversational robo advisors as surrogates of trust: onboarding experience, firm perception, and consumer financial decision making. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 49, 659–676. [24] Holzmeister, F., Huber, J., Kirchler, M., Lindner, F., Weitzel, U., Zeisberger, S., 2020. What drives risk perception? a global survey with financial professionals and laypeople. Management Science 66, 3977–4002. [25] Johnson, B.B., Slovic, P., 1995. Presenting uncertainty in health risk assessment: Initial studies of its e ff ects on risk perception and trust. Risk Analysis 15, 485–494. [26] Johnson, D., Grayson, K., 2005. Cognitive and a ff ective trust in service relationships. Journal of Business Research 58, 500–507. doi: 10.1016/S0148-2963(03)00140-1 .[27] Johnson-George, C., Swap, W.C., 1982. Measurement of specific interpersonal trust: Construction and validation of a scale to assess trust in a specific other. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 43, 1306. [28] Kim, S., McGill, A.L., 2011. Gaming with mr. slot or gaming the slot machine? power, anthropomorphism, and risk percep-tion. Journal of Consumer Research 38, 94–107. doi: 10.1086/ 658148 .[29] Kim, Y., Sundar, S.S., 2012. Anthropomorphism of computers: Is it mindful or mindless? Computers in Human Behavior 28, 241–250. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2011.09.006 .[30] Klein, K., Martinez, L.F., 2023. The impact of anthropomor-phism on customer satisfaction in chatbot commerce: an experi-mental study in the food sector. Electronic commerce research 23, 2789–2825. [31] Klingbeil, A., Gr ¨utzner, C., Schreck, P., 2024. Trust and re-liance on ai—an experimental study on the extent and costs of overreliance on ai. Computers in Human Behavior 160, 108352. [32] Letheren, K., Kuhn, K.A.L., Lings, I., Pope, N.K.L., 2016. In-dividual di ff erence factors related to anthropomorphic tendency. European Journal of Marketing 50, 973–1002. doi: 10.1108/ EJM-05-2014-0291 .[33] Li, Q., Luximon, Y., Zhang, J., 2023. The influence of anthropo-morphic cues on patients’ perceived anthropomorphism, social presence, trust building, and acceptance of health care conversa-tional agents: within-subject web-based experiment. Journal of Medical Internet Research 25, e44479. doi: 10.2196/44479 .[34] Li, Y., Wu, B., Huang, Y., Luan, S., 2024a. Developing trustwor-thy artificial intelligence: insights from research on interpersonal, human-automation, and human-ai trust. Frontiers in psychology 15, 1382693. 

21 Figure B.8: Interaction plot for PA × Cognitive Trust (CT). Predicted risk perception (RP) as a function of perceived anthropomorphism (PA) at low (−1 SD), mean, and high ( +1 SD) levels of cognitive trust (CT), based on the extended regression model. Shaded regions denote 95% confidence intervals. The PA–RP slope is strongest when CT is low and becomes flatter as CT increases, consistent with a negative PA ×CT interaction (attenuation of the PA–RP association at higher cognitive trust). [35] Li, Y., Wu, B., Huang, Y., Luan, S., 2024b. Developing trustwor-thy artificial intelligence: insights from research on interpersonal, human-automation, and human-ai trust. Frontiers in Psychology 15, 1382693. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1382693 .[36] Loewenstein, G.F., Weber, E.U., Hsee, C.K., Welch, N., 2001. Risk as feelings. Psychological bulletin 127, 267. [37] Luger, E., Sellen, A., 2016. Like having a really bad personal assistant: The gulf between user expectation and experience of conversational agents, in: Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Confer-ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. pp. 5286–5297. doi: 10.1145/2858036.2858288 .[38] Moorman, C., Zaltman, G., Deshpande, R., 1992. Relationships between providers and users of market research: The dynamics of trust within and between organizations. Journal of Marketing Research 29, 314–328. [39] Morana, S., Gnewuch, U., Jung, D., Granig, C., 2020. The e ff ect of anthropomorphism on investment decision-making with robo-advisor chatbots, in: Proceedings of the European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS 2020), Association for Information Systems, Marrakesh, Morocco. [40] Mori, M., MacDorman, K.F., Kageki, N., 2012. The uncanny valley [from the field]. IEEE Robotics & automation magazine 19, 98–100. [41] Munnukka, J., Talvitie-Lamberg, K., Maity, D., 2022. Anthropo-morphism and social presence in human–virtual service assistant interactions: The role of dialog length and attitudes. Computers in Human Behavior 135, 107343. [42] Nass, C., Moon, Y., 2000. Machines and mindlessness: Social responses to computers. Journal of Social Issues 56, 81–103. doi: 10.1111/0022-4537.00153 .[43] Nass, C., Steuer, J., Tauber, E.R., 1994. Computers are social actors, in: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Association for Computing Ma-chinery, New York, NY, USA. pp. 72–78. doi: 10.1145/191666. 191703 .[44] Pak, R., Fink, N., Price, M., Bass, B., Sturre, L., 2012. Decision support aids with anthropomorphic characteristics influence trust and performance in younger and older adults. Ergonomics 55, 1059–1072. [45] Peter, S., Riemer, K., West, J.D., 2025. The benefits and dangers of anthropomorphic conversational agents. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 122, e2415898122. [46] Qiu, L., Benbasat, I., 2009. Evaluating anthropomorphic prod-uct recommendation agents: A social relationship perspective. Information Systems Research 20, 415–434. [47] Reani, M., He, X., Luo, Y., Sun, Z., 2025. Fundamental over-attribution error: Anthropomorphic design of AI and its negative e ff ect on human perception. SSRN Electronic Jour-nal. URL: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5222775 , doi: 10. 2139/ssrn.5222775 . preprint. [48] Rempel, J.K., Holmes, J.G., Zanna, M.P., 1985. Trust in close relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 49, 95–112. [49] Roesler, E., Manzey, D., Onnasch, L., 2021. A meta-analysis on the e ff ectiveness of anthropomorphism in human-robot interac-tion. Science robotics 6, eabj5425. [50] Said, N., Schumacher, L., Hu ff , M., 2025. Artificial intelligence in medicine: The influence of medical expertise and perceived causability on medical AI risk and benefit perception. Journal of Risk Research , 1–15Advance online publication. [51] Salles, A., Evers, K., Farisco, M., 2020. Anthropomorphism in ai. AJOB Neuroscience 11, 88–95. doi: 10.1080/21507740. 2020.1740350 , arXiv:32228388 .[52] Schreibelmayr, S., Moradbakhti, L., Mara, M., 2023. First im-pressions of a financial ai assistant: di ff erences between high trust and low trust users. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence 6, 1241290. [53] Seeger, A., Janowski, R., 2021. Designing for trust in intelligent voice assistants: E ff ects of transparency and anthropomorphic cues. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 5, 1–23. 

22 Figure B.9: Interaction plot for PA × Aff ective Trust (AT). Predicted risk perception (RP) as a function of perceived anthropomorphism (PA) at low (−1 SD), mean, and high ( +1 SD) levels of a ff ective trust (AT), based on the extended regression model. Shaded regions denote 95% confidence intervals. The PA–RP slope becomes steeper as AT increases, consistent with a positive PA ×AT interaction (amplification of the PA–RP association at higher a ff ective trust). [54] Seeger, A.M., Pfei ff er, J., Heinzl, A., 2021. Texting with humanlike conversational agents: Designing for anthropomor-phism. Journal of the Association for Information Systems 22. doi: 10.17705/1jais.00685 .[55] Shekar, S., Pataranutaporn, P., Sarabu, C., Cecchi, G.A., Maes, P., 2025. People overtrust ai-generated medical advice despite low accuracy. NEJM AI 2, AIoa2300015. [56] Siegrist, M., Gutscher, H., Earle, T.C., 2005. Perception of risk: The influence of general trust, and general confi-dence. Journal of Risk Research 8, 145–156. doi: 10.1080/ 1366987032000105315 .[57] Slovic, P., Fischho ff , B., Lichtenstein, S., 1985. Characterizing perceived risk, in: Kates, R.W., Hohenemser, C., Kasperson, J.X. (Eds.), Perilous Progress: Managing the Hazards of Technology. Westview Press, Boulder, CO, pp. 91–125. [58] Slovic, P., Peters, E., Finucane, M.L., MacGregor, D.G., 2005. Aff ect, risk, and decision making. Health Psychology 24, S35– S40. doi: 10.1037/0278-6133.24.4.S35 .[59] Song, Y., Luximon, Y., 2020. Trust in ai agents: A systematic review of facial anthropomorphic trustworthiness for social robot design. Sensors 20, 5087. doi: 10.3390/s20185087 .[60] Stroessner, S.J., Benitez, J., 2019. The social perception of humanoid and non-humanoid robots: E ff ects of gendered and machinelike features. International Journal of Social Robotics 11, 305–315. doi: 10.1007/s12369-018-0502-7 .[61] Sun, Z., Reani, M., Luo, Y., Bao, Z., 2024. Anthropomorphism in chatbot systems between gender and individual di ff erences, in: Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. pp. 1–7. [62] Tour ´e-Tillery, M., McGill, A.L., 2015. Who or what to believe: Trust and the di ff erential persuasiveness of human and anthropo-morphized messengers. Journal of Marketing 79, 94–110. [63] Veres, Z., 2009. Competence-based risk perception in the project business. Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing 24, 237– 244. [64] de Visser, E.J., Monfort, S.S., McKendrick, R., Smith, M.A.B., McKnight, P.E., Krueger, F., Parasuraman, R., 2016. Almost human: Anthropomorphism increases trust resilience in cognitive agents. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied 22, 331– 349. doi: 10.1037/xap0000092 .[65] Waytz, A., Cacioppo, J., Epley, N., 2010a. Who sees human?: The stability and importance of individual di ff erences in anthro-pomorphism. Perspectives on Psychological Science 5, 219–232. doi: 10.1177/1745691610369336 .[66] Waytz, A., Cacioppo, J.T., Epley, N., 2010b. Who sees human? the stability and importance of individual di ff erences in anthro-pomorphism. Perspectives on Psychological Science 5, 219–232. doi: 10.1177/1745691610369336 .[67] Waytz, A., Heafner, J., Epley, N., 2014. The mind in the machine: Anthropomorphism increases trust in an autonomous vehicle. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 52, 113–117. [68] Zhou, Q., Yang, L., Tang, Y., Yang, J., Zhou, W., Guan, W., Yan, L., Liu, Y., 2025. The mediation of trust on artificial intelligence anxiety and continuous adoption of artificial intelligence tech-nology among primacy nurses: a cross-sectional study. BMC nursing 24, 724. [69] Zlotowski, J., Proudfoot, D., Yogeeswaran, K., Bartneck, C., 2015. Anthropomorphism: Opportunities and challenges in human–robot interaction. International Journal of Social Robotics 7, 347–360. doi: 10.1007/s12369-014-0267-6 .

23