Title: 2602.22343v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.22343v1

Published Time: Fri, 27 Feb 2026 01:05:05 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
Inter face Framework for Human -AI Collaboration within Intelligent User Interface 

# Ecosystems 

## Shruthi Andru 

Adobe Design, shruthia@adobe.com 

## Shrut Kirti Saksena 

Adobe Design, ssaksena@adobe.com 

Figure 1: A three -dimensional framework consisting of workflow complexity, AI autonomy, and AI reasoning providing designers with 

a structured method to assess and select an appropriate interface modality (s) based on specific task type s and AI capabilities . We 

propose a three -step approach: first evaluat ing the context based on risk ; second a set of dimensions and finally selecting the most 

suitable modality per the evaluation. 

As interfaces evolve from static user pathways to dynamic human -AI collaboration, no standard methods exist for selecting appropriate 

interface patterns based on user needs and task complexity. Existing frameworks only provide guiding principles for designing AI agent 2       

> capabilities. We propose a dimensional framework based on workflow complexity, AI autonomy, and AI reasoning to guide the des ign of
> context -aware, scalable AI interfaces aka modalities 1(e.g., prompt bars, split screens, full screens, etc.). The framework was developed
> through co -design workshops with designers of marketing products and refined through qualitative research with eight long -term AI users.
> The study evaluated the three dimensions, identified task -to -interface relationships, and surfaced the importance of both business impact
> and security risk across all high -autonomy scenarios. This framework provides product teams with a shared language to develop scalable
> AI interfaces, emphasizing fluidity between interfaces and progressive user control to balance AI auto nomy with human oversight.
> CCS CONCEPTS

• Human -centered computing • Human computer interaction (HCI) • HCI theory, concepts and models  

> Additional Keywords and Phrases:

AI Interface design , Human -AI collaboration, Design framework , Research -through -

design 

1 INTRODUCTION 

Interfaces form a necessary affordance in today’s software applications, bridging legacy SaaS tools with autonomous 

systems of the future [2,21] . Interactions within these interfaces act as a medium through which humans and agents 

collaborate to share intent and understanding of tasks that need to be accomplished . However, traditional interface design 

is rooted in static workflows and predetermined user pathways. This proves to be inadequate for the dynamic, intent -driven 

interactions that human -AI and multi -agent collaborations in today’s advanced applications need. 

Rapid AI application development cycles across enterprises, driven by competitive market pressure, have outpaced the 

development of systematic design methodologies for human -AI (H -AI) interface patterns. This leads to a rigid integration 

of AI capabilities into existing, disconnected SaaS ecosystems, adding to an already fragmented user experience. They also 

hinder the deployment of scalable AI solutions. Design decisions regarding AI are often centered on model capability and 

interaction types [9] , rather than the form through which these capabilities manifest. 

Furthermore, these AI interactions are often designed as isolated UI components without considering the broader 

context of user workflows. Recent research has highlighted the importance of contextual factors in human -AI interaction, 

with factors such as ta sk complexity, AI reasoning, and AI autonomy significantly affecting the effectiveness of human 

decision -making and collaboration with AI [13,18,31,38,57] . However, these insights have not been synthesized into an 

actionable framework that product teams can apply, leading designers to make UI decisions based on intuition rather than 

a systematic evaluation of human -AI collaboration principles. 

To address this problem and support this new reality, we propose a framework as shown in Figure 1. to guide the design 

of composable and scalable AI experiences [16] . Here, interfaces are positioned as first -class entities governed by 

contextual factors [47] . The framework enables designers to select an appropriate AI interface pattern based on workflow 

complexity, AI autonomy, and AI reasoning needs. It can be broken down into three parts: 

1. A taxonomy of eight AI interface modalities that capture the type of H -AI interactions needed for effective human -

AI collaboration in enterprise contexts. 

2. A three -dimensional evaluation system based on workflow complexity, AI autonomy, and AI reasoning. 

3. An evaluation method that includes risk assessment, dimensional evaluation, and interface pattern mapping to guide 

cross -functional product teams to make informed design decisions. 

The work in this paper also aims to:  

> 1Throughout this paper, modalities are referred to as interface patterns that we discuss in detail in section 3.1.1.

3

1. Establish use cases and detailed characterization of each of the eight modalities. 

2. Identify and map relationships between workflow complexity, AI autonomy, and AI reasoning levels for each 

modality. 

3. Provide an understanding of progressive user control to balance AI autonomy with human oversight. 

The framework was developed through a Research -Through -Design approach [54] , consisting of three structured co -

design workshops with twelve designers, which emphasized collaborative knowledge and shared decision -making. This 

was then followed by qualitative interviews with eight practitioners from the field to evaluate the framework. 

The implications of this work extend beyond interface design to add to the existing principles of effective human -AI 

collaboration. This framework has the potential to improve H -AI collaboration outcomes through increased efficiency in 

decision -making, reduce design inconsistencies, and provide modular patterns that accelerate the development of AI 

enterprise experiences. As AI capabilities continue to advance, frameworks like this ensure that interface design leverages 

emerging functionalities while remain ing grounded in human -centered design principles. 

2 RELATED WORK 

2.1 Human -AI Collaboration 

Human -AI Collaboration (HAIC) has emerged as a critical area of HCI research and is defined as the coordinated pursuit 

of shared goal s [9,11,15,17,19,22,23,30,50] . Designing effective collaboration depends on H -AI interaction, adaptability, 

explainability and trust [5,6,13,18,19,31,32,44,45,48] , leading to an increase in human capacity for decision making and 

problem solving [25,37,46] .

Considerations for designing effective HAIC were previously identified, ranging from intelligibility to agenc y

[19,27,49] . Frameworks like ADEPTS [14] also provide agent capabilities, such as disambiguation and transparency, but 

fail to demonstrate how these dimension s can be effectively used to design an user -facing interface. 

2.2 Interaction Layers in HAIC & Need for Interfaces 

The interaction layer serves as the primary collaboration surface for users to express their intent and interpret system 

behavior, as proposed by several framework s for effective HAIC [14,15,31,33,34,36,40,50,51] . One of the main challenges 

in designing interactions for evolving adaptive systems is the lack of predictable outputs . Moreover, mental models play a 

key role in AI -assisted human decision -making [4] and are critical to creating effective collaboration. This highlights the 

need for consistent and fluid interface patterns that facilitate both simplified decision -making and effective human -AI 

collaboration [20,53] .

2.3 Beyond Fixed UI Silos 

A survey of current AI systems shows that most AI interaction patterns are confined to fixed approaches where human 

interactions with the interface mainly consist of basic actions like menu selections or button clicks [24,26] . This suggests 

a broader pattern of AI interfaces being designed as fixed, standalone components rather than adaptive, integrated systems .

This forces humans to bridge gaps across these disconnected solutions instead of having a seamless handoff experience 

across agents, interfaces, and tasks . An example of this fragmentation is evident in conversational systems that are often 

considered to have isolated, stateless interactions that lack integration with broader workflows [24,41,52,56] .4

2.4 Current Frameworks and their Limitations 

Several frameworks [14,33,34,40,51,31,15,45] have been proposed to guide the design of human -AI collaboration, each 

stating principles for how humans interact with agents, but fail to describe how UI elements of the interaction layer work 

together [10,12,50] . While these frameworks outline detailed thinking on collaboration, they do not provide practical 

methods for making design decisions about selecting appropriate patterns for specific contexts . ADEPTS provides 

comprehensive guidance on agent capabilities but fails to provide a systematic method for determining how and where 

users should interact with these capabilities. While the field of HCI has developed a robust understanding of H -AI 

collaboration pr inciples and evaluation methods, the limitations of ex isting frameworks highlight a gap in a standardized, 

actionable method for selecting appropriate interface patterns based on contextual factors, such as task complexity. 

3 THE FRAMEWORK 

We propose an AI interface evaluation framework developed via a Research -through -Design approach [54] that provides 

designers, researchers, and developers with a structured method to design & develop intelligent user interfaces (IUI) for 

HAIC in complex enterprise workflows. The three -dimensional framework enables the systematic selection and design of 

AI interface patterns (modalities) through a structured evaluation of users’ workflow complexity, the degree of AI 

reasoning that an interface can support, & AI autonomy needed to accomplish a task. At its cor e, the framework aims to 

transition AI solutions designed for HAIC from isolated and fragmented experiences to composable, scalable patterns [16] .

Additionally, the framework is domain -agnostic and can be applied to any complex enterprise ecosystem that requires 

human -AI collaboration. 

3.1 Core Components of the Framework 

The framework consists of two main components: modalities and dimensions. 

3.1.1 Modalities 

In this paper, we refer to modalities as an interface pattern or form that manifests how the AI’s presence and capabilities 

are presented to the users. A modality functions beyond a UI container; each modality embodies design decisions about 

how visible, a ssistive, proactive , and agentic the AI is for a specific task the user intends to accomplish. The framework 

proposes eight distinct modalities describing the form AI interfaces should take , and the three dimensions providing the 

selection criteria for cho osing appropriate modalities based on the task. As shown in Figure 2. , the modalities are divided 

into four categories based on interaction, collaboration, and contextual requirements that the user has .5

Figure 2: Eight modalities based on the three dimensions in the framework 

Lightweight Interaction Modalities : These modalities facilitate quick and focused interaction with minimal cognitive 

load for the user. They are designed for rapid task completion without disrupting primary workflows and are information 

retrieval modalities 2. They consist of: 

1. Prompt Bar: The prompt bar offers users a compact, search -like interface with accompanying action buttons for 

quick actions. The interface appears as a horizontal input field where users can type in natural language. This 

modality is best suited for specific, single -step information queries. 

2. Hub: The hub is an expanded version of the prompt bar, offering users a command center -like interface to view 

recent interactions or suggested actions. This modality surfaces rich contextual data , an integrated chat interface and 

the ability to search and review objects . The hub also serves as a launching point for AI interactions and is best 

suited for users who need to explore AI capabilities or initiate complex workflows without needing a dedicated 

space.     

> 2Information Retrieval Modalities are lightweight entry points designed for fast information retrieval and low -stakes queries. These allow users to quickly
> surface facts, run simple natural language commands, or retrieve insights with minimal friction .

6

Contextually Integrated Modalities: These modalities embed AI assistance directly within existing workflows, allowing 

for seamless AI integration. They are designed to provide intelligent support that seamlessly integrates within the user’s 

current workflow and considered to be companion modalities 3. They consist of: 

3. Contextual: The contextual modality provides users with AI -driven suggestions, insights, or nudges by surfacing 

potential edits or improvements they can make, all within the context of their workflow. They appear to users as 

inline suggestions, smart annotations, or contextual tooltips without disrupting the user’s primary working area. This 

modality is best suited for proactive, transparent, actionable recommendations that users can engage or dismiss as 

needed. 

4. Rail or Panel: The rail modality provides users with a persistent AI presence in the context of their workflow 

through a docked side panel interface without obstructing the primary working area. This modality appears on the 

right side of the screen, containing conversat ional elements, controls, and additional contextual information related 

to the user’s current task. The rail is best suited when users need both reactive and proactive AI assistance, i.e., 

initiate conversations as well as receive contextual guidance. The persistent nature of the rail enables it to be present 

across applications while maintaining context and conversational history as users navigate through multi -application 

workflows. 

Dedicated Interaction Modalities: These modalities provide focused environments designed for intensive H-AI 

collaboration. Designed to offer a dedicated space that prioritizes AI interaction over other interface elements . They consist 

of: 

5. Full screen: The full -screen modality provides users with a full -page, immersive environment to interact with the 

AI for deep -focus tasks over an extended period . The interface features a large conversation area, dynamic cards 4

with rich media display and controls for managing complex AI interactions while preserving conversational history. 

The modality is best suited for supporting multi -turn conversations and tasks, such as detailed analysis, content 

generation, and ideation , that benefit from having maximum screen real estate. 

6. Split -screen: The split -screen modality offers users an adjustable, divided interface that provides equal focus on 

both AI assistance and primary content. The left side of this modality features the AI interaction interface, which 

includes conversation threads with dynamic cards , and the right portion displays primary content, such as 

documents, data visualizations, and the application surface. This modality is best suited for users who require real -

time collaboration with AI, enabling them to rapidly iterate on content while rec eiving immediate AI feedback and 

hence is referred to as an action -oriented modality 5.

Dynamic Content Modalities: These modalities provide users with a space for both user -generated and AI -generated 

artifacts. They are designed to provide users with the flexibility to manage, manipulate, and interact with AI -generated 

content in their workflows. They consist of: 

7. Canvas: The canvas modality provides users with a flexible workspace where they can develop AI -generated 

content by directly manipulating the interface. This modality features an open work area with drag -and -drop               

> 3Companion Modalities stay alongside the workflow to provide context, guidance, or augmentation without taking over the task. They feel like a partner or
> “sidekick.”
> 4Dynamic cards are recognizable, repeatable patterns for information that AI returns to the user in any modality.
> 5Action -oriented Modalities where the primary task work happens and either users or AI directly manipulate, edit, or create in these spaces. These carry
> the weight of execution by returning an output for every input provided.

7

functionality, resizable content blocks, and supports spatial reorganization based on workflow requirements. The 

modality is best suited for users who require version control capabilities, complex editing tools for manipulating 

visual layout, and collabora tive features that enable both individual and team -based creative processes. 

8. Immersive: This modality provides users with an advanced collaborative workspace where the AI tr anscends the 

role of a traditional AI assistant to become an active co -creator . The modality anticipates fluid interaction patterns 

where humans and AI can initiate actions , modif y shared artifacts and engage in deep prob lem solving across 

workflow types . While current AI capabilities and interface technologies limit immediate design and 

implementation , including this modality in the framework ensure s that future systems are built keeping this 

foundation in mind [6,23,46,56] .

3.1.2 Dimensions: criteria for evaluation of modalities 

Dimensions are qualitative levers that enable product teams to select the most suitable modality based on the context of 

the interaction needed for effective HAIC. This ensures that AI presence and behavior are consistent, creating fluid and 

intuitive expe riences across diverse interaction scenarios and collaboration needs. There are three main dimensions: 

1. Workflow complexity: This is a user -centered dimension that refers to the overall complexity or demand of the 

user’s task [10,12,31] . This dimension helps product teams determine how much support or guidance AI should 

provide for simple one -step tasks to dynamic multi -step workflows that require more proactive assistance. There are 

four levels of complexity, ranging from low to low -medi um, medium -high, and high. It is influenced by four equally 

weighted factors :

• Number of steps involved 

• Dependency on other tasks or objects in the platform ecosystem 

• Experience of the user, i.e., beginner vs expert 

• Coordination needed across tools, users, or data sources. 

2. AI autonomy: This dimension defines the degree of independence AI systems have while acting on behalf of the 

users. It helps product teams strike a balance between user control and the extent to which AI drives the experience 

[33,43,49] . The levels of AI autonomy range from low, where the AI waits for explicit user instructions, to high 

autonomy , where the AI proactively makes decisions and executes complex multi -step tasks with minimal user 

intervention [7,12,33,33,38,39,44] .

3. AI reasoning: This dimension refers to the AI’s ability to understand context and solve problems [27,31] . It helps 

teams determine how much intelligence is needed to support workflows and user experiences. In this dimension, we 

prescribe three levels of reasoning on a spectrum from low to high, as shown in Figure 1. 

3.2 Guardrails and Risk Mitigation 

All areas involving high AI autonomy should be designed with careful consideration, incorporating design guardrails that 

provide both transparency and explainability of AI actions as well as user control mechanisms [13,27,32,45] . This ensures 

that users can intervene and redirect AI actions at any point in the interaction thereby maintaining human authority over 

AI systems. 

There are two primary categories of potential impact when assessing a task . First is compliance and security risk, which 

assesses whether a task or workflow involves regulated data or compliance requirements, such as HIPAA or GDPR, in 

regulated industries like healthcare or financial domains. Second, is business impact assessment , which focuses on the 8

consequences of incorrect task execution that causes potential brand perception implications if the AI system makes errors 

or is compromised. 

3.3 Framework Operation and Modality Selection 

3.3.1 Present and Future State Considerations 

AI capabilities and technology are advancing at a rapid pace [58] . Current enterprise AI developments primarily operate 

between low and medium reasoning capabilities, where Prompt bar, Hub, and Contextual modalities offer lightweight 

interactions, while Full -screen and Split -screen modalities support more advanced interactions. As AI evolves towards 

multi -agent collaboration and higher autonomy, we anticipate that future state modalities, such as Immersive and Canvas, 

will support deeper reasoning capabilities. 

3.3.2 Fluid Transition Mechanism 

The framework prioritizes user control in selecting modality entry points 6, and transitions between these modalities should 

be designed to reflect the same. Users should be able to initiate interactions from any of the given modalities and seamlessl y

switch to another if needed, based on control, visibility, or space [53] .

3.3.3 Modality Selection 

The modality selection process involves a systematic three -step process for selecting the appropriate AI interface modality 

based on risk evaluation and dimension assessment , as shown in Figure 3.

1. Risk Assessment: First, product teams evaluate both categories of risk, namely compliance and security risk, as well 

as business impact risk. High -risk tasks require guardrails to be implemented before designing AI solutions. Low -

to medium -risk tasks can continue to assess dimensions and select interface modalities. 

2. Dimension Assessment: The next step in this process is to evaluate the dimensions in the following sequence. First, 

we assess workflow complexity based on the number of steps, the coordination required across users, tools, and data 

sources, and the user ex pertise levels. Next, we determine the level of AI independence based on task characteristics, 

users’ tolerance for risk, and comfort with AI making decisions. 

3. Modality Mapping: Teams then use the modality graph as shown in Figure 3. , to identify the best fit for their use 

case.       

> 6Modality entry points are defined as controls within a n interface that are either UI or natural language and let users transition from one modality to the
> next .

9    

> Figure 3:Flow -chart showing the three -step process based on risk evaluation and dimension assessment

4 METHODOLOGY 

Using a Research -through -Design approach [54] , we developed this framework in two distinct phase s. First, we ran three 

structured participatory co -design workshops with designers of marketing products to collaboratively construct the 

framework [42] . Second, we conducted semi -structured interviews with marketing practitioners in the field who had used 

AI tools for more than 5 months and evaluated the framework through a think -aloud protocol using an AI -generated 

prototype that employed these modalities. 

4.1 Co -Design workshops 

The Co -Design process was structured into three 90 -minute workshops, conducted over a three -week period. Each session 

employed specific participatory activities, allowing for progressive development and iteration of the framework. This 

approach enabled us to elicit tacit designer knowledge and collectively create an artifact that was developed through shared 

decision making [35,41,42,55,59] .

4.1.1 Participants 

The workshop engaged twelve UX Designers from multiple product teams within a large enterprise ecosystem, spanning 

customer data, analytics, content management, and journey orchestration domains. All participants had a robust 

understanding of AI interfaces and had previously designe d AI solutions for marketing products. The workshop was 

facilitated by two lead designers who had also previously designed enterprise AI and AI agent solutions. 

4.1.2 Procedure and Data Collection 

The three sessions are as follows: 

1. Session 1: Modality alignment and brainstorming dimensions 

The primary objective of this first session was to establish a set of modalities based on existing AI interface patterns 

and to begin brainstorming a set of dimensions that could be used to determine when each modality should be applied. The 

first 15 minutes of the session were spent identifying existing terms and AI interface patterns in the industry. The next 25 

minutes were spent individually listing definitions of these modalities and how they could be used in the given product 

context, using sticky not es. Subsequently, for the next 35 minutes, the participants engaged in a prioritization exercise 

using dot voting, followed by an open discussion to reach a consensus on the definition and use case of each modality. The 

remaining 15 minutes of the session were spent brainstorming metrics or dimensions used to evaluate AI UX [28,29] . The 10 

outcome of this session was the selection of seven main modalities, namely: Prompt bar, Hub, Preview, Full screen, Split 

screen, and Canvas. 

2. Session 2: Dimension alignment 

The second session focused on aligning on a set of dimensions that enabled designers to evaluate how a modality should 

be used. Designers spent the first 10 minutes revisiting the work from the previous session. A significant portion of the 

session, 25 min utes, was dedicated to clarifying the terminology of each dimension listed and resolving conceptual overlaps 

using sticky notes, dot voting, and moderated discussion. The session then continued with another activity, using the same 

methods to define the le vels, impact, and boundaries of each dimension. 

The session concluded by identifying the three main dimensions of the framework: workflow complexity (WC) , AI 

autonomy (AIA) , and AI reasoning (AIR) , which are divided into two categories: user considerations and AI controls .

3. Session 3: Determine workflow -to -modality and modality -to -dimension mapping 

The final co -design session was dedicated to mapping existing user workflows to modalities and mapping AI modalities 

across the dimensional axes. For the first 30 minutes, designers utilized the existing Jobs -To -Be -Done map [60] for each 

product and mapped them to the seven modalities. Next, in a 15 -minute activity , the designers map ped the modalities on a 

scale of low to high for AI reasoning through a facilitated discussion. The final 45 minutes were spent plotting the 

modalities onto a two -dimensional map, with user complexity and AI autonomy ranging from low to high, considering the 

level of AI reasoning each modality was capable of. This led to the identification of an additional, future -looking modality, 

Immersive, that enco mpasses all the other seven modalities. 

The key outcome of this session was a consolidated framework featuring eight core modalities, a set of three 

dimensions, identification of areas of risk that need design guardrails, and planned to understand how modalities could 

transition into each other through semi -structured user interviews. 

4.1.3 Analysis 

Following collaborative analysis principles [35] designers engaged in a collective interpretation of workshop outputs, 

rather than relying on a solo designer or research er -only analysis. The democratic consensus -building enabled transparent 

and consolidated decisions, leading to the development of a framework that was aligned across differing product domains. 

4.2 Semi -Structured Interviews 

We evaluated the framework through 90 -minute semi -structured interviews and think -aloud protocols [20] with eight 

marketing professionals who were long -term AI users, utilizing an interactive AI -generated prototype for the sessions [61] .

This approach enabled us to gather feedback on the effectiveness of modality across different task complexities and 

understand user preferences regarding AI reasoning and autonomy controls. 

4.2.1 Participant Recruitment and Demographics 

The participants were recruited using the enterprise company’s customer database through a screener questionnaire [3] .

The primary inclusion criteria required participants to be: 

1. Actively engaged in marketing activities such as demand generation, campaign execution, performance analysis, 

marketing automation, nurture campaign management, audience segmentation, audience activation data 

management, and cleansing. 11 

2. Utilize marketing tools to support these activities at least three to four times a week. 

3. Have experience experimenting with AI tools, including an AI assistant within their workflows. 

Additionally, participants were required to review and sign informed consent agreements before sharing Microsoft 

Teams link to join the session. 

The study consisted of eight participants, all of whom were above the age of 18, from the US and Canada. Based on 

established practices in qualitative evaluati ve studies , the resulting distribution provided us with participants who engaged 

in a wide range of marketing activities and were long -term AI users who would benefit from the systematic AI interface 

designs proposed by the framework. 

4.2.2 AI generated prototype 

We used an interactive prototype built using Cursor 7 to understand how users transition across modalities. Users begin 

with the Prompt bar on the home page using natural language input, which then transitions them to the Full screen for 

complex prompts like “create an audience”. The AI generates step -by -step plans with actionable steps. Selecting audience 

creation presents the user with a dynamic card that opens in the split -screen modality. The second step involves journey 

creation, producing a dynamic card with a button to “Open journey editor” that transitions them into a canvas -rail hybrid 

interface. The canvas provides them with a static workspace with suggestions from the contextual modality pre -populated, 

and the rail offers a docked conversational interface with transition controls to expand to the full -screen modality. 

Additionally, the floating action bar triggers the rail from the canvas, and a home button in the side navigation allows user s

to return to the starting point of this workflow. 

4.2.3 Procedure and data collection 

The remote 90 -minute sessions consisted of three phases: 

1. Phase 1: The sessions began with the introduction of the study's objectives, procedures, and expectations, and 

participants were asked to self -identify their level of usage of AI tools. Participants then described their role, 

company context, day -to -day re sponsibilities, marketing tool usage patterns, and experience with AI 

experimentation. 

2. Phase 2: This was followed by a think -aloud testing protocol with the interactive prototype. The participants were 

asked to reflect on the prototype within the context of audience and journey management workflows. They were 

specifically measured on the int uitiveness of the modality elements, usability of the experience, expectations for 

varying levels of task complexity, preferences around user control versus AI autonomy, and expectations for the 

level of AI reasoning supported by each modality. 

3. Phase 3: The last phase concluded with the participant’s reflection on their preferences, perceived benefits, concerns, 

and desired future interactions with AI modalities. 

4.2.4 Analysis 

Interview transcripts were analyzed using a thematic coding approach [1,8] , identifying themes and insights related to the 

effectiveness of the modality framework. Key themes included modality suitability across varying task complexities, 

preferences around AI autonomy and user control, expectations for AI reasoning, and the sea mlessness of transitions 

between modalities.   

> 7Cursor is a vibe -coding tool that uses generative AI to develop interactive prototypes.

12 

5 CASE STUDY 

To demonstrate the practical application of our framework, we present two marketing use cases that illustrate how the 

three -dimensional evaluation system guides the selection of modalit ies . Each case study provides details of the user's 

context, marketing task requirements, modality selection rationale via the dimension assessment, and task execution 

details . The modalities were chosen by assessing the sub -tasks within each task and carrying out the modality selection 

assessment , as show n in Figure 4. and F igure 5. , on each of these subtasks , determining the level of dimension for each 

task type. 

These case studies are low -risk real use cases from existing products that demonstrate how the framework enables 

designing contextually appropriate interfaces for similar workflow types across different products. For the case study, all 

the tools used were from a single suite of cloud -based marketing platform tools .  

> Figure 4:Flow -chart showing modality selection for creating, editing, and activating audiences in cloud -based platform

5.1 Case study 1: Creating, editing, and activating audiences 8 in cloud -based platform for collecting and 

analyzing customer data 

5.1.1 User context 

User: Brand media manager at a global footwear company 

Role: Responsible for audience targeting for digital campaigns 

Goal: Launch a new campaign promoting eco -friendly running shoes across North America 

5.1.2 Workflow analysis and modality selection 

1. Step 1: Conversation audience exploration 

Sub -task s: There are three sub -steps, namely, i nitial audience discovery , in-depth audience selection, detailed 

exploration , and audience size retrieval     

> 8An audience is a group of people that a system or campaign is design ed to reach

13 

Task execution: The user begins with the prompt bar modality to initiate the initial query for finding audiences for the 

campaign. The user then switches to the hub modality to access more in -depth audience selection without leaving the home 

page. They then transition to the full -screen modality for more detailed exploration, such as retrieving audience sizes, etc. 

2. Step 2: Audience creation and refinement 

Sub -task s: There are two sub -steps, namely, r eview AI steps and reasoning, view segme nt 9 details , and create new 

segments 

Task execution: The user continues the conversation in the full screen to review the steps suggested by the AI . The AI 

then provides a few previously created segments. The user then transitions to the split -screen to view more details and 

creates a new segment from the suggestions. This also provides the user with the ability to refine the audience while 

maintaining visibility of the AI insights. 

3. Step 3: Audience activation 10 

Sub -task s: There are two sub -steps, namely, r equest & review destination 11  suggestions , and configure details &

activate 

Task execution: The user switches back to the full screen modality and asks the AI to suggest destinations to activate 

this audience. After reviewing and selecting the destinations, the user chooses to open the audience in the canvas to 

configure additional details and activate. 

Figure 5: Flow -chart showing modality selection for journey creation and monitoring in cloud -based platform for campaign execution 

5.2 Case study 2: Journey 12  creation and monitoring in cloud -based platform for campaign execution 

5.2.1 User context 

User: Marketing automation specialist 

Role: Responsible for designing and optimizing journey campaigns 

Goal: Create a marketing journey to increase premium subscriptions for their customers             

> 9Segments are smaller sub -groups within an audience grouped by shared characteristics like behavior, demographics or preferences
> 10 Audience activation refers to the process of engaging a chosen segment group by delivering information, offers or messages th rough digital marketing
> channels.
> 11 Destinations are end channels where messages are sent so that experiences can be delivered to customers
> 12 A journey is a planned sequence of interactions that the customer experiences across different touchpoints within a marketing campaign .

14 

5.2.2 Workflow analysis and Modality Selection 

1. Step 1: Journey creation request 

Sub -tasks : There are three sub -steps, namely, specify requirements, clarify details with AI, and view journey details 

Task execution: The user uses the prompt bar to convey the request to AI, specifying initial journey requirements .

They are then directed to the full screen modality to respond to AI’s clarifying questions and is then provided with an AI -

generated journey returned in a dynamic card. The user views more details and a preview of the journey in the split -screen. 

This allows the user to view details while also allowing them to ask the AI follow -up questions about the journey. 

2. Step 2: Edit the suggested journey and activate 13 

Sub -tasks : There are four sub -steps, namely, e dit journey , review AI suggestions , ask follow -up questions, and activate 

journey 

Task execution: The user opens the journey in the canvas to view details of each node. This enables the user to view 

all the details and adjust the node placements as needed. The AI then suggests changes via the contextual modality, which 

the user accepts. The user also asks follow -up questions, using the rail modality. The user then activates the journey by 

selecting activate from the canvas. 

3. Step 3: Performance monitoring and optimization 14 

Task: There are two sub -steps, namely, view suggestions for optimization an d review suggestion 

Task execution: The user receives an alert and opens the rail to view AI suggestions for new user segments. After 

reviewing details in the full screen, the user dismisses the suggestion. 

5.3 Framework benefits 

The case studies demonstrate how the framework facilitates fluid modality transitions based on evolving task complexity, 

enabling progressive control as the user progresses from exploration to execution. The contextual appropriateness of the 

modalities als o matches the cognitive and interaction requirements of each workflow step. As users utilize multiple 

products from the marketing suite of platform tools , this framework enables them to preserve mental models across 

products, thereby enhancing the user exp erience within the ecosystem. 

6 DISCUSSION 

The study helped refine the framework and deepened our understanding of how task complexity, AI autonomy, and AI 

reasoning interact to determine which modality is most effective for a given marketing task. Below, we discuss some of 

the findings and implica tions from the work: 

6.1 Interplay of Task Complexity, AI Reasoning, and Autonomy in Modality Preference s

Our findings reveal two distinct but interconnected patterns: a linear relationship between task complexity and modality 

preference, and a non -linear relationship between AI reasoning, autonomy, and modality preferences .         

> 13 Journey activation is the action of deploying the planned sequence of steps for the customer within a marketing campaign.
> 14 Performance monitoring and optimization is measuring whether an audience or journey is achieving the goals and metrics to adj ust the strategy to
> further improve outcomes .

15 

6.1.1 Task complexity and modality preference. 

Modality preference here scaled linearly with the increasing demands of task complexity. Simpler, low -stakes tasks were 

expected to be carried out with lightweight modalities, such as the prompt bar, contextual, or rail, which were valued for 

their speed, ease, and unobtrusive guidance. As task complexity increased, participants gravitated towards more immersive, 

tangible button -and -click modalities such as split -screen and canvas. These modalities afforded greater control, visibility, 

reversibility, and co llaboration that were deemed essential for managing multi -step, non -linear, and precision tasks. 

6.1.2 AI reasoning and context. 

The expectations around AI reasoning and autonomy diverged from this linear pattern. As shown in Figure 6. , reasoning 

requirements did not simply increase with task complexity but flexed dynamically depending on the context and task 

complexity that could be handled by the modality. For example, in canvas and split -screen, participants expected high 

reasoning depth, stepwise explanations, artifact 15  integration, and layered guidance. We found that they were most suitable 

for complex, non -linear workflows and precision tasks. Conversely, modalities like contextual and rail were expected to 

provide high levels of intelligent reasoning, surfacing timely clarifications or optimizations without interrupting the flow. 

Another notable factor was that as reasoning depth increased, participants expected modalities to provide more space, 

richer artifacts, and tighter integration, except in cases where reasoning was expected to enhance the flow without 

disrupting it, such as the contextual modali ty .    

> Figure 6:Non -linearity in AI reasoning spectrum within modalities

A central theme that emerged from the study was the importance of how AI reasoning is communicated across 

modalities. Participants not only expected the AI to explain why a particular response or suggestion was generated but also   

> 15 An ar tifact is an AI generated output.

16 

required that this reasoning be delivered in a way that aligned with the constraints and affordances of the interface, making 

modality -specific reasoning essential. Mismatches between the explanation format and modality constraints, such as overly 

verbose outputs in limited spaces, led to frustration and eroded trust in the AI. This finding highlights the importance of 

information density and the necessity of tailoring explanations to the visual capacity of each modality. Figure 7. illustrates 

this relation ship by mapping information density against task complexity and modality space .  

> Figure 7:Mapping information density against task complexity and modality space

Thus, effective modality design must ensure that explanations are both context -sensitive and space -appropriate, 

sustaining trust and accountability without overwhelming or distracting the user. 

6.1.3 AI autonomy spectrum and modalities 

Modality preferences also reflected trade -offs between complexity and autonomy. Modalities capable of handling high 

complexity, such as split -screen and canvas, did not necessarily support high autonomy, as participants often desired 

greater control in such contexts. These were expected to balance autonomy with user control for complex workflows and 

were perceived as human led .

In contrast, modalities such as the prompt bar and rail were seen as AI -led, with the system taking initiative for speed 

and efficiency in simple or repetitive tasks. These modalities were trusted for automating low -stakes actions . Sitting 

between these extremes, split screen and full screen were regarded as collaborative modalities, supporting a shared 

partnership in which both the human and AI contributed to task completion. These modalities were valued for their ability 

to balance AI autonomy with user o versight, enabling flexible division of labor. 

A key design implication is the need for progressive control within AI -led and collaborative modalities . Progressive 

control ensures that while AI can take initiative and accelerate tasks, users retain the ability to intervene, adjust, and re direct 

outcomes at any point. Thus, progressive control provides a bridge between task -based and emerging goal -based 17 

workflows. Such flexibility is essential not only for everyday efficiency but also for high -stakes tasks where precision, 

accountability, and trust are paramount .

6.2 The Role of Risk in Modality Preference 

Risk emerged as a critical factor shaping user preferences for AI modalities. Participants emphasized that risk amplifies 

the precision required in execution. When tasks carried high risk, whether low or high com plexity , participants consistently 

favored modalities that emphasized UI controls. These were described as familiar, predictable, and reliable, offering users 

confidence that errors could be quickly identified and corrected. Additionally, modalities that relied heavily on AI 

autonomy were seen as le ss appropriate in such contexts, as they did not provide the same level of transparency or user 

oversight. 

Thus, risk is not merely operational but also strategic and reputational . D esigners are recommended to pair high -stakes 

workflows with user -controlled, transparent, and auditable modalities, while reserving highly autonomous modalities for 

low -stakes contexts, at least until AI reaches accuracy and verifiability on par with human judgment [48] .

6.3 Fluid and Bi -Directional Modality Transitions 

The study emphasized the importance of fluid, bidirectional transitions between modalities. Participants consistently 

stressed that transitions should not be one -way or require cumbersome workarounds. Instead, every transition need s to be 

designed to ensur e reversibility, efficiency, and minimal disruption to workflow. For example, as shown in Figure 8., users 

should be able to move from split -screen to canvas and vi ce a versa seamless ly , without requiring extra steps or reliance 

on natural language commands. This expectation reflected a broader desire for flexibility as tasks evolved, with users 

wanting to move fluidly between modalities as complexity or needs shifted. Moreover, it was o bserved that UI controls 

remain essential in the near term for switching between modalities over natural language commands. 18   

> Figure 8:Diagram showcasing fluidity and need for bidirectionality in modality transitions

6.4 Implications 

6.4.1 Extending current understanding of AI Interface design: 

Our framework contributes a novel approach to designing cohesive AI experiences across product ecosystems, bridging 

the gap between theoretical principles and practical implementation .

Prior literature on human –AI collaboration [9,11,15,19,20,22,26,30,31,33,40,50,62] has emphasized autonomy, 

intelligibility, and task delegation as central considerations in agent -based experiences. Building on this foundation, our 

work extends the discussion in several important ways. First, we foreground the role of workflow complexit y within task 

delegation, highlighting how the intricacies of multi -step, non -linear workflows shape user needs for both interface design 

and agent architecture. Second, we introduce information density as a function of both modality space and task complex ity, 

positioning explainability as one component within a broader reasoning process that governs how AI communicates its 

intent to the user. This perspective advances prior discussions of intelligibility [27] by specifying how explanation [27,32] 

content tailored to interface constraints to facilitate seamless human -AI collaboration. Finally, while existing literature [50] 

only addresses workflow complexity at the level of agent architecture, our work contributes a complementary perspective 

by examining how complexity must also be accommodated in user -facing interface design. 

6.4.2 Transforming design practice 

For design practitioners, this framework provides a new systemic method for making AI interface design decisions. It also 

enables design teams to work with standardized interaction patterns that help users preserve mental models across different 

AI -powered applications. This is especially valuable for organizations rapidly developing AI features, where consistent 

approaches can improve both user experiences and reduce development costs. 

The identification of progressive user control addresses concerns about relative AI autonomy and user control and 

provides design patterns that maintain human oversight along with AI assistance .

The study's findings also suggest that AI systems should be designed with multiple interaction modalities in mind from 

the beginning, rather than retrofitting interface elements onto existing systems. 19 

7 CONCLUSION 

Jef Raskin once said, “As far as the customer is concerned, the interface is the product” [63] . Similarly, when it comes to 

AI powered applications, the interface becomes the sole mediator between human intention and artificial intelligence 

capabilities. There is more to interface design than simply providing access to AI functionality, it fundamenta lly shapes 

how users conceptualize, communicate intent, trust and interact with AI system s. Thus, designing consistent interfaces is 

the key to Human -AI Collaboration. 

In this paper, we mapped use -cases to modalities, established a relationship between three dimensions and provided an 

understanding of progressive user control to balance AI autonomy with human oversight. The findings show that 

while modality preferences scale linearly with task complexity, AI reasoning and AI autonomy interact in non -linear, 

context -sensitive ways to shape effective modality design for marketing tasks. Our proposed interface selection framework 

bridges the gap between high -level human -AI c ollaboration principles and design decisions, enabling practitioners to move 

beyond ad -hoc interface choice s to evidence based, contextually appropriate, scalable design solutions. 

As the rapid proliferation of AI systems continues , we hope this framework provides designers, researchers and 

developers with the tools to create effective, scalable interfaces leading to trustworthy and empowering Human -AI 

collaboration. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Sirwan Khalid Ahmed, Ribwar Arsalan Mohammed, Abdulqadir J. Nashwan, Radhwan Hussein Ibrahim, Araz Qadir Abdalla, Barzan Moha mmed M. 

Ameen, and Renas Mohammed Khdhir. 2025. Using thematic analysis in qualitative research. Journal of Medicine, Surgery, and Public Health 6: 

100198. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.glmedi.2025.100198 

[2]  Saleema Amershi, Dan Weld, Mihaela Vorvoreanu, Adam Fourney, Besmira Nushi, Penny Collisson, Jina Suh, Shamsi Iqbal, Paul N. Bennett, Kori 

Inkpen, Jaime Teevan, Ruth Kikin -Gil, and Eric Horvitz. 2019. Guidelines for Human -AI Interaction. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on 

Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’19), 1 –13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300233 

[3]  Aaron D. Arndt, John B. Ford, Barry J. Babin, and Vinh Luong. 2022. Collecting samples from online services: How to use scree ners to improve data 

quality. International Journal of Research in Marketing 39, 1: 117 –133. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2021.05.001 

[4]  Gagan Bansal, Besmira Nushi, Ece Kamar, Walter S. Lasecki, Daniel S. Weld, and Eric Horvitz. 2019. Beyond Accuracy: The Role of Mental Models 

in Human -AI Team Performance. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing 7: 2–11. 

https://doi.org/10.1609/hcomp.v7i1.5285 

[5]  Shlomo Berkovsky, Ronnie Taib, and Dan Conway. 2017. How to Recommend? User Trust Factors in Movie Recommender Systems. In Proceedings 

of the 22nd International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI ’17), 287 –300. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025171.3025209 

[6]  J. Bieniek, M. Rahouti, and D. C. Verma. 2024. Generative AI in Multimodal User Interfaces: Trends, Challenges, and Cross -Platform Adaptability. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2411.10234 

[7]  Jeffrey M. Bradshaw, Robert R. Hoffman, David D. Woods, and Matthew Johnson. 2013. The Seven Deadly Myths of “Autonomous Syst ems.” IEEE 

Intelligent Systems 28, 3: 54 –61. https://doi.org/10.1109/MIS.2013.70 

[8]  Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology 3, 2: 77 –101. 

https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa 

[9]  Zichen Chen, Yunhao Luo, and Misha Sra. 2025. Engaging with AI: How Interface Design Shapes Human -AI Collaboration in High -Stakes Decision -

Making. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2501.16627 

[10]  Ruijia Cheng, Alison Smith -Renner, Ke Zhang, Joel Tetreault, and Alejandro Jaimes -Larrarte. 2022. Mapping the Design Space of Human -AI 

Interaction in Text Summarization. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational 

Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , 431 –455. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.naacl -main.33 

[11]  Dominik Dellermann, Adrian Calma, Nikolaus Lipusch, Thorsten Weber, Sascha Weigel, and Philipp Ebel. 2021. The future of huma n-AI 

collaboration: a taxonomy of design knowledge for hybrid intelligence systems. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2105.03354 

[12]  Zijian Ding and Joel Chan. 2023. Mapping the Design Space of Interactions in Human -AI Text Co -creation Tasks. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.06430 

[13]  Derek Doran, Sarah Schulz, and Tarek R. Besold. 2017. What Does Explainable AI Really Mean? A New Conceptualization of Perspe ctives. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1710.00794 

[14]  Pierluca D’Oro, Caley Drooff, Joy Chen, and Joseph Tighe. 2025. ADEPTS: A Capability Framework for Human -Centered Agent Design. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2507.15885 20 

[15]  George Fragiadakis, Christos Diou, George Kousiouris, and Mara Nikolaidou. 2025. Evaluating Human -AI Collaboration: A Review and 

Methodological Framework. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2407.19098 

[16]  Yoann Gabillon. 2015. User interface composition: operators and composability checking. In Proceedings of the 27th Conference on l’Interaction 

Homme -Machine (IHM ’15), 1 –8. https://doi.org/10.1145/2820619.2820632 

[17]  Catalina Gomez, Sue Min Cho, Shichang Ke, Chien -Ming Huang, and Mathias Unberath. 2024. Human -AI collaboration is not very collaborative yet: 

A taxonomy of interaction patterns in AI -assisted decision making from a systematic review. https://doi.org/10.485 50/arXiv.2310.19778 

[18]  R. Hoffman, Shane T. Mueller, Gary Klein, and Jordan Litman. 2018. Metrics for Explainable AI: Challenges and Prospects. ArXiv . Retrieved 

September 10, 2025 from https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/be711f681580d3a02c8bc4c4dab0c7a043f4e1d2 

[19]  Steffen Holter and Mennatallah El -Assady. 2024. Deconstructing Human -AI Collaboration: Agency, Interaction, and Adaptation. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2404.12056 

[20]  Tingting Jiang, Zhumo Sun, Shiting Fu, and Yan Lv. 2024. Human -AI interaction research agenda: A user -centered perspective. Data and Information 

Management 8, 4: 100078. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dim.2024.100078 

[21]  Victor Kaptelinin and Bonnie Nardi. 2012. Affordances in HCI: toward a mediated action perspective. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 

Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’12), 967 –976. https://doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208541 

[22]  Harmanpreet Kaur. 2019. Building Shared Mental Models between Humans and AI for Effective Collaboration. Retrieved September 10, 2025 from 

https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Building -Shared -Mental -Models -between -Humans -and -AI -

Kaur/bc47b075dcbb2a170740d5 da1d51d954efb62748 

[23]  G. Klien, D.D. Woods, J.M. Bradshaw, R.R. Hoffman, and P.J. Feltovich. 2004. Ten challenges for making automation a “team pla yer” in joint human -

agent activity. IEEE Intelligent Systems 19, 6: 91 –95. https://doi.org/10.1109/MIS.2004.74 

[24]  Lorenz Cuno Klopfenstein, Saverio Delpriori, Silvia Malatini, and Alessandro Bogliolo. 2017. The Rise of Bots: A Survey of Co nversational Interfaces, 

Patterns, and Paradigms. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (DIS ’17), 555 –565. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3064663.3064672 

[25]  Vivian Lai, Chacha Chen, Q. Vera Liao, Alison Smith -Renner, and Chenhao Tan. 2021. Towards a Science of Human -AI Decision Making: A Survey 

of Empirical Studies. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2112.11471 

[26]  Jiayang Li and Jiale Li. 2024. A Map of Exploring Human Interaction patterns with LLM: Insights into Collaboration and Creati vity. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2404.04570 

[27]  Brian Y. Lim, Anind K. Dey, and Daniel Avrahami. 2009. Why and why not explanations improve the intelligibility of context -aware intelligent 

systems. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’09), 2119 –2128. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/1518701.1519023 

[28]  Yuwen Lu, Yuewen Yang, Qinyi Zhao, Chengzhi Zhang, and Toby Jia -Jun Li. 2024. AI Assistance for UX: A Literature Review Through Human -

Centered AI. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.06089 

[29]  Reuben Luera, Ryan A. Rossi, Alexa Siu, Franck Dernoncourt, Tong Yu, Sungchul Kim, Ruiyi Zhang, Xiang Chen, Hanieh Salehy, Ji an Zhao, 

Samyadeep Basu, Puneet Mathur, and Nedim Lipka. 2024. Survey of User Interface Design and Interaction Techniques in Genera tive AI Applications. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2410.22370 

[30]  Lukas William Mayer, Sheer Karny, Jackie Ayoub, Miao Song, Danyang Tian, Ehsan Moradi -Pari, and Mark Steyvers. 2025. Human -AI Collaboration: 

Trade -offs Between Performance and Preferences. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2503.00248 

[31]  Melanie J. McGrath, Andreas Duenser, Justine Lacey, and Cecile Paris. 2024. Collaborative human -AI trust (CHAI -T): A process framework for active 

management of trust in human -AI collaboration. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2404.01615 

[32]  Tim Miller. 2019. Explanation in artificial intelligence: Insights from the social sciences. Artificial Intelligence 267: 1–38. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2018.07.007 

[33]  Ahmad Mohsin, Helge Janicke, Ahmed Ibrahim, Iqbal H. Sarker, and Seyit Camtepe. 2025. A Unified Framework for Human AI Collab oration in 

Security Operations Centers with Trusted Autonomy. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2505.23397 

[34]  Caterina Moruzzi and Solange Margarido. 2024. A User -centered Framework for Human -AI Co -creativity. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI 

Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’24), 1 –9. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613905.3650929 

[35]  Michael J. Muller. 2007. PARTICIPATORY DESIGN: THE THIRD SPACE IN HCI. In The Human -Computer Interaction Handbook (2nd ed.). CRC 

Press. 

[36]  Meena Devii Muralikumar and David W. McDonald. 2025. An Emerging Design Space of How Tools Support Collaborations in AI Desig n and 

Development. Proc. ACM Hum. -Comput. Interact. 9, 1: GROUP2:1 -GROUP2:28. https://doi.org/10.1145/3701181 

[37]  Fredrik Nordin and Annika Ravald. 2023. The making of marketing decisions in modern marketing environments. Journal of Business Research 162: 

113872. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2023.113872 

[38]  Thomas O’Neill, Nathan McNeese, Amy Barron, and Beau Schelble. 2022. Human –Autonomy Teaming: A Review and Analysis of the Empirical 

Literature. Human Factors 64, 5: 904 –938. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720820960865 

[39]  Francesco Piccialli, Diletta Chiaro, Sundas Sarwar, Donato Cerciello, Pian Qi, and Valeria Mele. 2025. AgentAI: A comprehensi ve survey on 

autonomous agents in distributed AI for industry 4.0. Expert Systems with Applications 291: 128404. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2025.128404 

[40]  Jeba Rezwana and Mary Lou Maher. 2023. Designing Creative AI Partners with COFI: A Framework for Modeling Interaction in Huma n-AI Co -

Creative Systems. ACM Trans. Comput. -Hum. Interact. 30, 5: 67:1 -67:28. https://doi.org/10.1145/3519026 

[41]  Malak Sadek, Rafael A. Calvo, and Céline Mougenot. 2023. Co -designing conversational agents: A comprehensive review and recommendations for 21 

best practices. Design Studies 89: 101230. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.destud.2023.101230 

[42]  Elizabeth B. -N. Sanders and Pieter Jan Stappers. 2008. Co -creation and the new landscapes of design. CoDesign 4, 1: 5–18. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/15710880701875068 

[43]  Silvia Schiaffino and Analía Amandi. 2004. User - interface agent interaction: personalization issues. Int. J. Hum. -Comput. Stud. 60, 1: 129 –148. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2003.09.003 

[44]  Ben Shneiderman. 2020. Human -Centered Artificial Intelligence: Reliable, Safe & Trustworthy. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2002.04087 

[45]  Chameera De Silva, Thilina Halloluwa, and Dhaval Vyas. 2025. A Multi -Layered Research Framework for Human -Centered AI: Defining the Path to 

Explainability and Trust. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2504.13926 

[46]  Mark Steyvers and Aakriti Kumar. 2024. Three Challenges for AI -Assisted Decision -Making. Perspectives on Psychological Science 19, 5: 722 –734. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/17456916231181102 

[47]  Lucy A. Suchman. 2006. Human -Machine Reconfigurations: Plans and Situated Actions . Cambridge University Press, USA. 

[48]  Lingyun Sun, Zhuoshu Li, Yuyang Zhang, Yanzhen Liu, Shanghua Lou, and Zhibin Zhou. 2021. Capturing the Trends, Applications, Issues, and 

Potential Strategies of Designing Transparent AI Agents. In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 

(CHI EA ’21), 1 –8. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451819 

[49]  Andreas Tsamados, Luciano Floridi, and Mariarosaria Taddeo. 2025. Human control of AI systems: from supervision to teaming. AI and Ethics 5, 2: 

1535 –1548. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681 -024 -00489 -4

[50]  Yun Wang and Yan Lu. 2025. Interaction, Process, Infrastructure: A Unified Architecture for Human -Agent Collaboration. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.11718 

[51]  Wei Xu. 2025. A User Experience 3.0 (UX 3.0) Paradigm Framework: Designing for Human -Centered AI Experiences. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.23116 

[52]  Chaoyun Zhang, Shilin He, Jiaxu Qian, Bowen Li, Liqun Li, Si Qin, Yu Kang, Minghua Ma, Guyue Liu, Qingwei Lin, Saravan Rajmoh an, Dongmei 

Zhang, and Qi Zhang. 2025. Large Language Model -Brained GUI Agents: A Survey. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2411.18279 

[53]  Chaoyi Zhao and Wei Xu. 2025. Human -AI Interaction Design Standards. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2503.16472 

[54]  John Zimmerman, Erik Stolterman, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2010. An analysis and critique of Research through Design: towards a form alization of a research 

approach. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (DIS ’10), 310 –319. https://doi.org/10.1145/1858171.1858228 

[55]  Douglas Zytko, Pamela J. Wisniewski, Shion Guha, Eric P. S. Baumer, and Min Kyung Lee. 2022. Participatory Design of AI Syste ms: Opportunities 

and Challenges Across Diverse Users, Relationships, and Application Domains. In Extended Abstracts of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors 

in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’22), 1 –4. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3516506 

[56]  2025. Trends, Challenges and Processes in Conversational Agent Design: Exploring Practitioners’ Views through Semi -Structured Interviews | Request 

PDF. In ResearchGate . https://doi.org/10.1145/3571884.3597143 

[57]  Designing Human -Agent Collaborations: Commitment, responsiveness, and support | Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 

Computing Systems. Retrieved September 10, 2025 from https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3491102.3517500 

[58]  The 2025 AI Index Report | Stanford HAI. Retrieved September 10, 2025 from https://hai.stanford.edu/ai -index/2025 -ai -index -report 

[59]  A Collaboration System Model for Planning and Evaluating Participatory Design Projects. International Journal of Dsign . Retrieved September 11, 

2025 from https://www.ijdesign.org/index.php/IJDesign/article/view/3486 

[60]  The Jobs To Be Done Playbook | Free EBook with Purchase | Jim Kalbach. Rosenfeld Media . Retrieved September 11, 2025 from 

https://rosenfeldmedia.com/books/jobs -to -be -done -book/ 

[61]  How Many Interviews Are Enough? - Greg Guest, Arwen Bunce, Laura Johnson, 2006. Retrieved September 10, 2025 from 

https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1525822x05279903 

[62]  Human -AI collaboration is not very collaborative yet: a taxonomy of interaction patterns in AI -assisted decision making from a systematic review. 

CoLab . Retrieved September 10, 2025 from https://colab.ws/articles/10.3389%2Ffcomp.2024.1521066 

[63]  Jef Raskin - Wikiquote. Retrieved September 10, 2025 from https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Jef_Raskin