Title: Language Model Memory and Memory Models for Language

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.13466v1

Published Time: Tue, 17 Feb 2026 01:18:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# Language Model Memory and Memory Models for Language 

Benjamin L. Badger ∗

IBM 

ben.badger@ibm.com 

Abstract 

The ability of machine learning models to store input information in hidden layer vector embeddings, analogous to the concept of ‘memory’, is widely employed but not well characterized. We find that language model embeddings typically contain relatively little input information regardless of data and compute scale during training. In contrast, embeddings from autoencoders trained for input regeneration are capable of nearly perfect memory formation. The substitution of memory embeddings for token sequences leads to substantial computational efficiencies, motivating the introduction of a parallelizable encoder-decoder memory model architecture. Upon causal training these models contain information-poor embeddings incapable of arbitrary information access, but by combining causal and information retention objective functions they learn to form and decode information-rich memories. Training can be further streamlined by freezing a high fidelity encoder followed by a curriculum training approach where decoders first learn to process memories and then learn to additionally predict next tokens. We introduce the perspective that next token prediction training alone is poorly suited for accurate memory formation as the objective itself is non-invertible, motivating the use of combined objective functions for models where the entire input is not exposed. 

# 1 Introduction 

A fundamental feature of machine learning models is their ability to store and use information. The nature of this information storage and processing varies depending on the model in question, but for transformer-based large language models information is stored in the model’s parameters as well as the activations of various layers. With some slight oversimplification, one can think of the information attained during training as existing in the model’s weights and the information attained from any given input as existing in the model’s activations. In this work we focus on the informational content language models posses from being exposed to an input token sequence, not its training data. For convenience we use the notion of the last hidden layer embedding of the last token of an input sequence and that model’s ‘memory’ of that sequence interchangeably. The substitution of memory embeddings for sequences of tokens gives clear benefits to many aspects of inference computation (such as lower time to first token and smaller KV cache sizes), and has been attempted in various forms because of this. To date memory models have shown promise for single-lookup (phonebook) style tasks (Bulatov et al., 2022) and associative retrieval (Rodkin et al., 2025) and variable-length compression (Dai et al., 2019), but have not been widely adopted for general language tasks. In this work we provide a basis for why memory models have underperformed their full-context counterparts, namely that as they currently exist they are incapable of the arbitrary information access characteristic of full-context Transformers, which we argue is a necessary element in their emergent abilities for tasks they have not been explicitly trained for (see (Radford et al., 2019)). Because of this we focus on memory model architectures designed with three primary considerations: next token prediction training efficiency, arbitrary input information storage and use, and parallelization.   

> ∗The author would like to thank IBM for support during the writing of this paper. Code may be found on https: //github.com/blbadger/memorymodels .

1

> arXiv:2602.13466v1 [cs.CL] 13 Feb 2026

# 1.1 Related Work 

LLMs have been found to be invertible in certain scenarios: (Morris et al., 2023) observed accurate con-versational prompt input regeneration using last hidden layers or even logits. We provide results to show that input sequence regeneration from output embeddings is much lower for larger context windows over more diverse language corpus, which may be predicted by observing the low out-of-distribution compared to in-distribution results in that work. (Weller et al., 2025) found that single-embedding retrieval models far underperform both their theoretical potential as well as multi-embedding or classic search algorithms when matching a query to lists. From the perspective and results presented in this paper, we provide a basis for these observations: retrieval of one element in a list requires near-lossless compression of those list elements into the embeddings, but the amount of compression possible if each list element is randomly sampled is necessarily low. Numerous investigations into the use of embeddings as memories exist, most being motivated by the potential to extend context windows of models. One that is particularly relevant is (Bulatov et al., 2022), where the authors incorporate one or more embedding from a causal decoder on a context sub-window into future sub-windows in a recurrent manner. Somewhat analogously, (Dai et al., 2019) uses stop-gradient transformations to allow multiple hidden layer embeddings from past tokens to inform a model’s prediction of future tokens. (Lin et al., 2025) optimizes retrieval-augmented generative search by augmenting causal decoder inputs with memory embeddings. Contemporaneously with this work, (Prakash et al., 2025) introduced a nearly identical parallelized memory model architecture to one of those presented in this work (the non-frozen transformer-based memory model) and explore the benefits of training this model at somewhat larger compute and data scales. (Sukhbaatar et al., 2021) investigate the creation and destruction of memories for very long-context modeling with fixed memory usage. The primary point of departure in our work is the recognition that memory models should allow for near-arbitrary information lookup to be comparable with full-context transformers, which with the finding that causal training is generally unsuitable for high-fidelity memory formation necessitates a new training paradigm for these models. 

# 2 Our Contribution 

This work seeks to address the following question: 

How accurate are causal language model memories, or in other words how much input information do these models retain? 

and we answer this as "not very much". The need to access arbitrary input elements for modern language tasks makes such models unsuitable for providing memory embeddings to other models, which combined with the observation that autoencoders are capable of highly accurate memory formation motivates the following question: 

Can models be trained to form accurate memories, and can causal decoders learn to use information from perfect-memory encoders? 

where we find that the answer is again "yes". We introduce the following methods and approaches: 1. Information extraction methods via inversion for two architectures 2. An information quantification approach for cross-model comparison 3. Parallelizable memory model architectures with combined objective functions for accurate memory 4. Frozen-memory architectures for arbitrary information retention via curriculum training 

# 3 Memory and Useful Memory 

# 3.1 Why Memory? 

The most common application of deep learning language models today is autoregressive generation, where a sequence of tokens is fed to the model and tokens are predicted one at a time. In order to predict any single next token it may generally be assumed that only a small fraction of previous tokens are required, although it cannot be determined a priori which tokens these will be due to the inherent freedom in language 2such that any previous token’s information may be requested to predict a next token. A prediction step for these models may be described as a function f : X → Y where X ∈ Zn is the sequence of n input tokens and Y ∈ Z1 is the single output token, where f is by many-to-one function. If we disregard tokens and consider only embeddings of tokens X ∈ Rn×d and output memory embeddings Y ∈ Rd we again have a many-to-one function, specifically one that maps sequences of vectors to vectors. Many-to-one functions are typically non-invertible and as such offer no guarantees of how much input information will be stored in any intermediate state. In our parlance, there is no guarantee that models trained to predict each next token will have good internal memory because they are exposed to the entire input and are optimized on an objective of predicting a single next token at a time, which normally requires the knowledge of only a handful of previous tokens. Because of this it can be argued that causal models are unlikely to form high-information embeddings, as they would not be expected to need to do so to minimize training loss. Understanding memory informational content is more important when models are not exposed to the entire input, if for example a model were to use an embedding in place of a sequence of tokens. Memory model inference is made more difficult by the need to be able to extract any of the relevant information in memory embeddings, as this stipulation leads to the requirement that embeddings contain all necessary input information because which tokens will and will not be used in the future is usually not predictable. The benefits of such models are greatly reduced computation at inference, explored in the next section. 

# 3.2 Computational Complexity 

The design of effective memory models is motivated by numerous computational efficiencies at inference: for a given sequence, memory models requires less cache memory and computation, leading to lower time-to-first-token, lower on-device memory, and higher token throughput. These models are expected to trade increased computation at training (as the extra step of storing and decoding memories must be learned as well as next token prediction) for this decreased inference computation. For Transformer memory models for n tokens the computation for full-context models is proportional to n2, whereas for a memory model embedding with s

sequences (‘chunks’) of n/s tokens each the computation is proportional to s(n/s )2 for the encoder and s2

for the decoder. Upon solving for the minimum value of the maximum of these functions, we find that the ideal value of s in terms of n is s = n2/3 which results in computation proportional to n4/3. In this work we investigate memory models in which encoder forward passes may be parallelized during training and inference, which for full parallelization with the above assumptions reduces the encoder’s complexity to be proportional to n2/3 = s and does not change the decoder’s complexity. In the case where global memory bandwidth is limiting (which is common for single sample inference) memory models offer another substantial speedup: rather than loading n ∗ d elements per layer per token predicted, n2/3 ∗ d elements are loaded for each token predicted assuming s = n2/3. For this work we typically use s < n 2/3, specifically s = 4 for n = 1024 or 

n = 2048 , raising the computational complexity but lowering the number of cache elements loaded. 

# 3.3 Theory: Model Invertibility and Information Retention 

What does it mean for a model’s memory of an input to be good or bad? We answer this question as follows: a good memory is one that is accurate, in that it can be used to accurately reconstruct that input. Equivalently, a good memory contains all the information necessary to uniquely identify any given input, and for information-rich inputs such as language the memories are necessarily also information-rich. Also equivalently, a good memory is one that allows the model to be inverted. Invertibility in the context of deep learning models is a concept subtle enough to require further explanation, which we explore here. In the usual notation, given a model θ and input X we obtain an output embedding 

Y as Y = O(X, θ ). Strictly speaking, model θ is invertible if and only if that equality may be represented by a function f : X → Y that is bijective, meaning both injective (one-to-one) and surjective (onto). If there are some values of Y to which f does not map some input to the model is not onto, or if there are values of Y

that multiple values of X map to then the model is not one-to-one; in either case it is not strictly invertible. It may be easily appreciated that typical language model architectures are not invertible in this strict sense because they are composed of functions that are themselves not invertible: for example, the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) makes use of linear transformations in MLPs, normalization layers, and attention operations all of which are non-invertible (most easy to demonstrate is that they are non-injective). 3In this sense, none of the models or architectures presented in this work are invertible to the degree that when arbitrary inputs are generated to approximate language model outputs, there is generally no guarantee that the generated input will approximate the original in any way (Badger, 2025). On the other hand, suppose X is a non-infinite set such as a collection of training samples, and Y the non-infinite set of model embeddings of these inputs: in this case, the model is invertible if and only if it is representable by a function f : Xn → Yn that maps each input to a unique output, which we index by n ∈ { 0, 1, ..., N } for dataset size N . Testing for invertibility over a finite dataset requires only that the number of unique outputs equals the number of unique inputs, and over practically all dataset and model combinations used today this is almost guaranteed to be true due in part to the extremely high dimensionality of the outputs and the non-linear nature of θ (for measurements on image datasets, see (Badger, 2023)). In this input-restricted sense, therefore, language models are all invertible. These considerations motivate a third definition of model invertibility: an invertible model is one in which for a given set of inputs, each model output may be mapped to the corresponding input in that set with a mapping that is computationally feasible to find and perform. If we allow the inverse function to be trainable and assuming the the inverse function mirrors the model in some way, it can be assumed that finding the inversion function will be much more difficult than actually performing it. Essentially we consider models invertible if an inversion function can be practically found. Equivalently, a model with a good memory is one where some method can be feasibly found that can accurately reconstruct any input on a given corpus given the memory embedding. Computational feasibility being in the eye of the beholder, we define it to be around 96 V100 hours (around 24 H100 hours) which is a maximum theoretical total of around 170 ∗ 10 18 FLOP. Training details are given in section S1.1. 

# 4 Language Model Memory Measurement 

Prior work (Badger, 2025) found that two foundational models exhibited different degrees of invertibility or equivalently information information retention using a gradient descent technique. Like most inversion methods that don’t involve training, that method was found to be incapable of accurately inverting single embeddings. We replace the gradient descent with a trainable decoder model to provide a more powerful inversion method, inspired by (Morris et al., 2023). 

# 4.1 Information Measurement Methods 

We first tested language model inversion for relatively small models over the same dataset that these models were trained on (reporting hold-out evaluation data), and to do so we use a subset of the relatively large and varied FineWeb dataset, FineWeb-edu (Penedo et al., 2024), which is itself filtered from Common Crawl snapshots. The experimental approach we take is as follows: first a model is trained for a given language task, then its parameters are frozen and a trainable decoder is added, the decoder is trained to invert the model’s embeddings over its training dataset, and a measurement of this inversion in terms of information retention is obtained. In order to apply this technique to models of different types, we use two metrics that yield tokenizer size-independent estimates: an entropy ratio that measures the fraction of information of the input the embedding contains, and a Hamming metric-based token identification accuracy metric. The rationale behind the use of the entropy ratio Hr is as follows: cross-entropy loss is equivalent to the number of bits per token required to convert the models’ distribution to the target, where the model’s output is a sequence of vectors of size |t|, the size of the tokenizer. We now define upper and lower bounds for this metric: the upper bound is simply zero as a perfect model requires no change to its output distribution to match the target, and the lower bound we compute as shown in Equation 1, which is the average of the cross entropy between an informationless output (the uniform distribution U(|t|), which has maximum entropy) and sample t from any target distribution. We then take the complement of the ratio of achieved loss to upper bound loss (Equation 2). The lower bound may also be thought of as normalizing for the differences between tokenizers of various sizes, as it is clearly more difficult to guess a token from a very large tokenizer than one with only a few possible tokens which is reflected in the denominator of (2). For the 8k-size tokenizer most commonly used in this work, (2) simplifies to Hr = 1 − H(p, q )/9.03 .4H(p0, q ) = 1

n

X

> n

L (U(|t|), t ) (1) 

Hr = 1 − H(p, q )

H(p0, q ) = 1 − − P 

> x

q(x) log( p(x)) 

− P 

> x

q0(x) log( p(x)) (2) We also use a Hamming metric-based measurement that provides the proportion of input tokens that the decoder has successfully inverted, which in words is the complement of the fraction of non-pad tokens that are correctly identified, and formally given in Equation 3 which we typically report as token accuracy in terms of % correct for disambiguation. This metric can be viewed as a somewhat higher bar than Hr , as containing a certain number of bits per token may or may not lead to its accurate identification. 

h(x, y ) = 1 − 1

j Card ( {xi̸ = yi}) : xi̸ = tpad , i ∈ 0, 1, ..., j (3) 

# 4.2 Information Retention 

We test the amount of information contained in a model as follows: given an arbitrary model M , we first convert this model to a form appropriate for obtaining an embedding (removing language modeling or classification heads as necessary), such that it becomes an encoder mapping input tokens to a single embedding, E : Zn → Rd. We then freeze the parameters of E and add a decoder (usually of the same size and architecture as the encoder) D : Rn×d → Zn that takes as input he encoder’s last hidden layer, last token embedding E(X, θ )[: ,−1] . The encoder’s embedding is unrolled via a trainable projection which maps 

P : Rd → Rn×d after (Morris et al., 2023). The unrolling process is described in more detail in (Badger and Neligeorge, 2025) and essentially amounts to applying a trainable linear projection from a sliding (in the embedding dimension) window of the the encoder’s embedding to form all decoder inputs, and results in more efficient training than repeat or single-embedding introduction to the decoder. During our control experiments we found that replacing the encoder’s frozen token embedding layer with a trainable transformation results in less decrease to validation model accuracy, and this is performed unless otherwise noted. The complete encoder-decoder information retention model is described by Equation 4 and is depicted in Figure 1. 

Y = D(P (E(X, θ )[: ,−1] ), θ D ) (4) 

# 4.3 Causal Language and Retrieval Models but not Autoencoders exhibit Poor Memory 

Upon training encoder-decoder information retention models, we find that encoder loss tends to plateau and decrease only marginally with more training samples as shown in Figure 1. We find that models trained for next token prediction (causal modeling) and retrieval exhibit little increase in information retention compared to untrained models, but that autoencoders trained for input regeneration have substantially more information (Table 1). We confirmed that the decoder-only training approach for information retention measurement does not lead to substantial under-estimation of information retention in pretrained autoencoders, where the encoder’s information content is known (Figure S1, Table 1). 

# 4.4 Autoencoder Memories are Non-Trivial 

We reasoned that the high memory fidelity, or equivalently high compression of autoencoders relative to causal and retrieval models could be caused by the encoder learning to embed the input in a non-data-dependent manner, which we call a ‘trivial’ autoencoding. One example of such an encoding would be possible for any model where the encoder’s embedding dimension is at least as large as the number of tokens in the input, 

dm ≥ nctx , in which case the encoder could learn to simply encode one token per embedding element. We tested the data dependence of trained autoencoders by observing the cross-entropy loss of these models applied 5Figure 1: Information retention experimental approach (left) and example training runs (right). Masked Mixer Transformer Encoder Model Loss Hr Accuracy Loss Hr Accuracy Autoencoder ( nctx = 256 validation) 0.01 0.999 99.6 % 0.09 0.99 95.4 % Autoencoder (validation) 0.292 0.968 91.84 % 2.73 0.698 43.3 % Autoencoder 0.435 0.952 76.96 % 2.935 0.624 33.5 % Untrained 5.937 0.343 4.67 % 6.643 0.264 4.67 % Causal 5.815 0.356 5.48 % 6.214 0.31 5.01 % Causal -> Retrieval 5.594 0.381 5.45 % 6.380 0.29 5.29 % Autoencoder -> Retrieval 5.64 0.375 5.46 % - - -Table 1: Information Retention (all models nctx = 512 , n l = 8 mixers dm = 1024 and transformers dm = 512 ,trained for 200k steps). ‘Causal -> Retrieval’ signifies a model first pretrained for causal modeling, then trained for retrieval via InfoNCE. Validation models were trained as autoencoders once, rather than trained followed by a freeze on the encoders and re-trained. to sequences of uniform random tokens, and observe that the this loss is far higher than the in-distribution loss (Figure S2). We further observe that trivial embeddings are not trainable with our autoencoders and optimization methods: training autoencoders on sequences of uniform random tokens results in no optimization (Figure S2). We also find that autoencoders trained on FineWeb generalize well to marginally out-of-distribution FineMath inputs (Figure S3). 

# 4.5 Larger LLM Memory 

We tested whether large increases in model size and increased pretraining compute and data would result in greater information retention by training decoders using embeddings from off-the-shelf LLMs. We chose to investigate BERT large (Devlin et al., 2019) as this model contains around five times the number of parameters as the transformers presented in the last section and was trained with 10x the compute, as well as Qwen 3 0.6b which is 9x the size of the transformers we trained (Yang et al., 2025) and Llama3.1 1b at 14x the size (Grattafiori et al., 2024), both trained with >1000x the compute. For this experiment, we freeze the pretrained model’s token embedding layer and model layers (without a language modeling head) and feed the last hidden layer output to a decoder after unrolling. As shown in Table 2, there is a modest increase in token accuracy and entropy ratio for the same context as observed previously ( nctx = 512 ). These results contrast with those obtained in (Morris et al., 2023), where conversational prompts were able to be recovered from causal LLMs. We hypothesized that there may be two reasons for this; firstly that shorter ( nctx ≤ 64 ) inputs should be easier to invert as they contain less information, and secondly that 6Model nctx = 16 nctx = 64 nctx = 256 nctx = 512 

BERT large 0.719 (40.2%) 0.481 (11.6 %) 0.406 (6.6 %) 0.376 (5.96 %) Llama 3.1 1b 0.665 (34.8 %) 0.490 (11.2 %) 0.434 (6.0 %) 0.419 (5.30 %) Qwen 3 0.6b 0.614 (35.7 %) 0.459 (12.7 %) 0.414 (6.62 %) 0.402 (5.61 %) BERT large (FineMath) 0.891 (72.3 %) 0.641 (26.8 %) 0.528 (12.6 %) 0.491 (9.6 %) Table 2: FineWeb (unless otherwise noted) LLM information retention for the given context windows. Entropy ratio Hr and token accuracies in terms of % correctly identified are reported. less-diverse inputs should be easier to invert. We tested the first hypothesis by observing input regeneration for smaller contexts, and find an inverse correlation between prompt length and regeneration accuracy (Table 2). The second hypothesis was tested by training decoders to invert BERT outputs on a math-specific subset of the FineWeb, FineMath 4+ (Allal et al., 2025), and we observe nearly double the token recovery accuracy per context window on this dataset. 

# 5 Memory Models 

# 5.1 Architecture and Implementation 

Seeking to parallelize where possible, we introduce a memory architecture whereby an encoder is responsible for mapping sequences of tokens to an embedding, and a decoder takes any number of these embeddings in addition to any additional tokens of a sequence. These models have the notable advantage over decoder-only models such as (Bulatov et al., 2022) in that they are capable of parallelizable processing of input sequences at inference, as the formation of any single embedding requires no input from any other embedding such that the encoder may be applied to all s chunks in parallel. We train these models for causal modeling and to control for differences in decoder context length, we also train memory models without embeddings (embedding are replaces with tensors of ones). 

Figure 2: Memory Model Architecture and nctx = 256 per chunk, s = 4 chunk causal training characteristics on FineWeb. Mixers are dm = 512 for encoders, dm = 1024 for decoders and Transformers dm = 256 and 

dm = 512 for compute equivalence. We explore two varieties of memory model embedding introduction, one where a variable number of memory embeddings are introduced and token embeddings follow immediately, and the other where memory embeddings are introduced and padded such that the embeddings from the same memory chunks are always found in the same decoder positions. We find little difference in causal training efficiency, and in the rest of this work use the fixed embedding approach (Figure S4). 75.2 Causal Language Training Efficiencies of Memory Models 

Causal training efficiencies of memory models are given in Figure 2, and we find that memory models can be nearly as efficient to train as full-context models but that this is somewhat architecture- and context window chunk size- dependent. We compared the causal training efficiencies of this parallelized memory model to that from an architecture where decoders recurrently form and process memory embeddings introduced by (Bulatov et al., 2022), which we implemented for both mixers and transformers with a single memory embedding per segment. Hypothesizing that a division between information retention and information extraction at the architectural level would assist training efficiency, we find that the parallelized encoder-decoder memory models are slightly more efficient to train on FineWeb than decoder-only recurrent memory models (Figure S5). 

# 5.3 Frozen Encoder Memory Models Train Efficiently Too 

If the task of a memory model encoder is to capture as much information about their inputs as possible, we can separate encoders from decoders by first training the encoder to capture information and then training the decoder to predict next words using that information. This allows for increased parallelism and throughput during training, as frozen encoders don’t form gradients and can be applied iteratively. As shown in Figure S7, with frozen autoencoder encoders memory model training efficiency approaches that of memory models with both encoder and decoder trainable. 

# 5.4 Pretrained LLMs as Memory Model Decoders 

We next investigated whether or not it would be possible to adapt an LLM trained for next token prediction using token embeddings to use memory model embeddings as well. Using Llama 3.2 (1b) (Grattafiori et al., 2024) as the memory model decoder, we trained autoencoders to use the Llama 3 tokenizer, attached encoders from these models to trainable decoders and trained on the nctx = 256 , s = 4 copy task depicted in Figure 3. We find that these models require the use of relatively small learning rates to prevent divergence, apparently due to difficulties backpropagating gradients through the entirety of Llama 3.2, and train relatively slowly (except for an initial drop in loss if trainable encoders are used) but do minimize the copy loss metric as shown in Figure S6. The use of a frozen information-rich encoder results in worse initial copy accuracy but faster convergence. We next investigated whether memory model training would interfere with the abilities Llama 3.2 gained during pretraining via benchmark evaluation of the decoder: we find that benchmark accuracy decreases somewhat after memory model training for most benchmarks tested but is most affected for pretrained (non-input) information retention as measured by MMLU accuracy (Tables S1 and S2). 

# 6 Combined objectives for Accurate Memories 

To be able to make use of arbitrary input information, memory models that use embeddings in place of token sequences must be capable of both encoding this information into embeddings and processing it in the decoder, and we test the potential for memory models to learn to do so in this section. 

# 6.1 Experimental Setup and Evaluation 

We use three methods for evaluating memory accuracy in memory models: the encoder-decoder information retention test detailed in Section 4.2, a copy objective originally introduced by (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) in which a sequence of tokens is sampled from the dataset, the first half is copied to the second, losses are masked on the first and the model is evaluated on its ability to accurately predict the copied tokens (having seen the correct tokens previously), and what we term a ‘blank copy’ objective in which the tokens are masked, and only memory embeddings are available for the decoder when attempting to predict next tokens (Figure 3). The copy task as applied to a memory model is a test of the model’s ability to transfer sufficient information from the first s/ 2 chunks for a s chunk model to the decoder to predict each single next token, given than the first half of the sequence contains all information necessary to perform this prediction. This is notably a less information-intensive task than the autoencoding information retrieval task because all 8previous tokens not encoded by a memory embedding are given to the decoder in its attempt to predict token 

n, such that a model with no information retention ability achieves a copy accuracy equivalent to its next token prediction accuracy (which from Table 3 is around 42%) whereas an autoencoder with no information retention ability achieves near-zero input reconstruction accuracy. The blank copy task is designed to require the same informational content as encoder-decoder information. In our implementations, we copy sequences of 512 input tokens on-demand in the forward pass. 

Figure 3: (a) Copy and (b) Blank Copy experimental schematics The difference between the information measured by blank copy (or encoder-decoder retention models) and copy tasks may be summarized as follows: blank copy information is equivalent to the ability to the average per-token information necessary to construct the entire input sequence from scratch, and the copy metric is the average per-token information necessary to add a single arbitrary next token to the input sequence given all previous tokens. 

# 6.2 Causal Memory Model Embeddings have Little Information 

As we observed relatively little information in causal decoder embeddings, we investigated whether encoders from causal-trained memory models would too. We first measured this via copy task training in which the memory model encoder is frozen and the decoder trained, before measuring performance on the more information-intensive encoder-decoder information extraction and blank copy tasks. We find that causal-trained memory models exhibit minimal increases in copy accuracy over the non-memory controls (Figure 4 (d)), do not exhibit substantially higher information retention than causal full-context decoders (Figure 4 (b)), nor are they capable of learning the blank copy task (Figure 4 (c)). 

# 6.3 Curriculum Learning for Decoding Frozen Encoder Memory 

We were surprised to observe that frozen autoencoder encoder embeddings conferred no benefit to copy model training (Figure 4 (a)), despite these embeddings containing a near totality of input information (Table 1). Reasoning that this might be because decoding tokens (specifically predicting next tokens while disregarding memory embeddings) may be easier than decoding information-rich embeddings leading to models reaching local minima during training, we tested a curriculum learning approach where memory model decoders first learn to process information-rich memories without token embeddings followed by introduction of token embeddings. After training frozen autoencoder encoder memory models on the blank copy task (Figures 4 (c), S8) we then trained the models on the copy task and find that copy accuracy further increases (Figure 4 (d)), indicating that the memory model decoders are capable of using sufficient information from frozen autoencoder encodings for copying. In contrast, causal-trained encoders are unsuitable for this curriculum approach as they are poorly trainable to copy without token information (Figure 4 (c)) and result in a modest increase in copy accuracy when trained without this curriculum (Figure 4 (d)). 

# 6.4 Causal and Copy Combined Objectives for Accurate Memory Formation 

Given that memory models are capable of next token prediction and accurate memory formation in isolation, we investigated whether these models are capable of both conjunction. As memory models trained for next token prediction alone do not tend to form or make use of accurate memories, we train memory models using a linear combination of cross-entropy loss of next token prediction and copy training ( Xs denotes shifted inputs, Xc denotes copied inputs with a copy delimiter added for disambiguation, and Xsc shifted copied inputs) given in Equation 5. As shown in Table 3, memory models are capable of learning to accurately 9Figure 4: Memory Model Information Content and Copy Training. (a) Memory model training on for the copy task. (b) dm = 256 , n ctx = 512 Transformer and dm = 512 , n ctx = 256 Mixer memory model encoder information, (c) Memory Transformer training on the blank copy task, (d) Frozen encoder copy training, all curriculum trained except CLM encoder and Memory encoder. All models dm = 512 , n l = 16 , n ctx = 256 , s = 4 

unless otherwise noted and copy 512 tokens. copy and predict next tokens. For the more difficult task of copying without token provided, training via the combined objective function yields lower copy and causal accuracies, and in this case the curriculum trained frozen encoder results in higher accuracy than memory models with trainable encoders (Table 3). Training memory models to form and decode information-rich embeddings results in a modest decrease in causal training efficiency, as does the use of frozen autoencoder embeddings although this comes with the benefit of increased throughput during training. 

L′ = L(O(X, θ ), X s) + L(O(Xc, θ ), X sc ) (5) The combined objective training results suggests that memory models are capable of learning to make and decode information-rich encodings and accurately predict next tokens causally, and which task the model performs depends on whether there is a memory delimiter (three special tokens sequentially) or not such Objective Combined CLM Combined (Blank Metric Hr Accuracy Hr Accuracy Hr Accuracy CLM Eval 0.675 42.07 % 0.684 43.15 % 0.669 41.5 % All Trainable Copy Eval 0.947 86.1 % 0.688 43.65 % 0.756 50.6 % CLM Eval 0.664 40.8 % 0.677 42.32 % 0.660 40.4 % Frozen Encoder Copy Eval 0.927 82.7 % 0.677 42.63 % 0.759 52.6 % Table 3: Combined and causal trained memory model performance on causal and copy tasks. 10 Information Benchmarks Causal Combined 

IFEval (strict instance) 0.2482 0.2506 

LongBench  

> Code Completion

13.17 ±0.31 16.48 ±0.33  

> Few-Shot Learning

0.80 ±0.11 1.57 ±0.12  

> Multi-Document QA

0.54 ±0.09 0.51 ±0.09 Single Document QA 0.81 ±0.07 1.07 ±0.08  

> Summarization

2.89 ±0.11 3.41 ±0.12  

> Information Retrieval

0.86 ±0.34 0.83 ±0.37 

SWDE (contains) 0.0 0.81 Other Benchmarks Causal Combined 

MMLU 22.99 ±0.35 23.09 ±0.35 

ARC easy 44.2 ±1.02 43.73 ±1.02 

WikiText (BPB) 1.6752 1.6850 Lambada-OpenAI 18.65 ±0.54 17.21 ±0.53 

HellaSwag 27.71 ±0.45 27.52 ±0.45 

Table 4: Causal versus copy and causal combined objective benchmark accuracy. Both models are frozen encoder-based memory transformers with dm = 512 , n l = 16 , n ctx = 256 , s = 4 . All benchmarks are higher is better apart from WikiText. that there is no guarantee that the model accurately uses input information during next token prediction. Nevertheless, we find that training a model on the combined objective function leads to notable improvements in input information-related but not general language understanding benchmark performance compared to causal training alone (Table 4), indicating that the encoder information is indeed used during causal modeling even though this is not explicitly trained. We note that more benefits would be expected for memory models that use combined objectives that better integrate causal and copy objectives, for instance if the dataset were to contain samples of natural language-based information retrieval. 

# 7 Discussion 

# 7.1 Information retention in masked mixers and transformers 

As a general rule, mixers are typically more efficient encoders in terms of information retention and use per compute applied during training, whereas transformers are typically more efficient decoders. These findings seem to imply that an optimal architecture for modeling using encoders for information retention and decoders for filtering would consist of mixer encoders and transformer decoders, but we find that embeddings from masked mixers are typically poorly compatible with transformer decoders, to the extent that introducing frozen memory model embeddings from masked mixers leads to a decrease in training efficiency relative to non-memory controls (Figure S9). Even when encoders are trainable, we observe a substantial decrease in training efficiency when we pair masked mixer-based encoders with transformer decoders, implying that the manifolds learned by these architectures tend to be substantially different depending on the architecture. 

# 7.2 How much information is enough? 

In this work we have examined information retention using various methods (autoencoder input regeneration, copy, blank copy) and metrics (entropy ratio and token accuracy). A natural question to ask is which method and metric most closely reflects the ability of a model to perform arbitrary input information access. It is clear that token accuracy is a more strict metric than entropy ratio (in that it is always lower for the same model) and that autoencoder input regeneration and blank copy are more strict methods than copy (models with good autoencoder input retention accuracy invariably are capable of accurate copy, but models with accurate copy accuracy do not necessarily exhibit high input information retention or blank copy accuracy). In the context of memory models it may be hypothesized that copy accuracy is most relevant to tasks where 11 less information needs to be accessed, but this remains to be rigorously tested. 

# 7.3 Implications for Retrieval 

The finding that language model embeddings are low-information has obvious implications for retrieval. Language model-based retrieval typically occurs by embeddings chunks of text of many target documents, embedding the query, and matching query and target documents using cosine similarity between the query embedding and all targets. Modern retrieval approaches often use multiple embeddings, reranking models, and increasingly approaches such as BM25 to increase the likelihood that the retrieved text matches the target. But as has been noted by (Weller et al., 2025) and others, retrieval model accuracy is often much lower than what is theoretically possible for information-rich targets, especially in the case where arbitrary information needs to be retrieved against. Our work provides a clear rationale for these findings: many embedding models used today (regardless of pretraining on causal or masked language modeling objectives) contain only a fraction of input information even for relatively small ( nctx < 256 ) chunks, such that arbitrary information in each chunk cannot in general be identified by these models. It remains to be seen whether or not standard retrieval training methods are compatible with information retention. 

# References 

Aydar Bulatov, Yuri Kuratov, and Mikhail S. Burtsev. Recurrent memory transformer, 2022. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.06881 .Ivan Rodkin, Yuri Kuratov, Aydar Bulatov, and Mikhail Burtsev. Associative recurrent memory transformer, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.04841 .Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Quoc V. Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Transformer-xl: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1901. 02860 .Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog , 1(8):9, 2019. John X. Morris, Wenting Zhao, Justin T. Chiu, Vitaly Shmatikov, and Alexander M. Rush. Language model inversion, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.13647 .Orion Weller, Michael Boratko, Iftekhar Naim, and Jinhyuk Lee. On the theoretical limitations of embedding-based retrieval, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.21038 .Xiaoqiang Lin, Aritra Ghosh, Bryan Kian Hsiang Low, Anshumali Shrivastava, and Vijai Mohan. Refrag: Rethinking rag based decoding, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.01092 .Jatin Prakash, Aahlad Puli, and Rajesh Ranganath. Attention and compression is all you need for controllably efficient language models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.05313 .Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Da Ju, Spencer Poff, Stephen Roller, Arthur Szlam, Jason Weston, and Angela Fan. Not all memories are created equal: Learning to forget by expiring, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2105.06548 .Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/ 2017/file/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf .Benjamin L. Badger. Masked mixers for language generation and retrieval, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2409.01482 .12 Benjamin L. Badger. Adversarial examples from dimensional invariance, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2304.06575 .Guilherme Penedo, Hynek Kydlíček, Loubna Ben allal, Anton Lozhkov, Margaret Mitchell, Colin Raffel, Leandro Von Werra, and Thomas Wolf. The fineweb datasets: Decanting the web for the finest text data at scale, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.17557 .Benjamin L. Badger and Matthew Neligeorge. Know your limits: Entropy estimation modeling for compression and generalization, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.10618 .Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805 .An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, and Beichen Zhang et al. Qwen3 technical report, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388 .Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, and Abhinav Jauhri et al. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783 .Loubna Ben Allal, Anton Lozhkov, Elie Bakouch, Gabriel Martín Blázquez, Guilherme Penedo, Lewis Tunstall, Andrés Marafioti, Hynek Kydlíček, Agustín Piqueres Lajarín, Vaibhav Srivastav, Joshua Lochner, Caleb Fahlgren, Xuan-Son Nguyen, Clémentine Fourrier, Ben Burtenshaw, Hugo Larcher, Haojun Zhao, Cyril Zakka, Mathieu Morlon, Colin Raffel, Leandro von Werra, and Thomas Wolf. Smollm2: When smol goes big – data-centric training of a small language model, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.02737 .Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation , 9(8):1735–1780, 1997. doi:10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735. Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 38–45, Online, October 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL 

https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.emnlp-demos.6 .Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101 ,2017. Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge. ArXiv ,abs/1803.05457, 2018. Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. Hellaswag: Can a machine really finish your sentence?, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.07830 .Denis Paperno, Germán Kruszewski, Angeliki Lazaridou, Quan Ngoc Pham, Raffaella Bernardi, Sandro Pezzelle, Marco Baroni, Gemma Boleda, and Raquel Fernández. The lambada dataset: Word prediction requiring a broad discourse context, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.06031 .Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.03300 .13 Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Baber Abbasi, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Foster, Laurence Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Alain Le Noac’h, Haonan Li, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muennighoff, Chris Ociepa, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Hailey Schoelkopf, Aviya Skowron, Lintang Sutawika, Eric Tang, Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin Wang, and Andy Zou. The language model evaluation harness, 07 2024. URL 

https://zenodo.org/records/12608602 .

# S1 Appendix 

# S1.1 Training Details 

We train using models by integrating Pytorch (Paszke et al., 2019) defined modules into the Huggingface transformers Trainer (Wolf et al., 2020) utility, adding preprocessing or evaluation processing as required. We train using the torch implementation of AdamW (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2017), typically with a 500 step linear warm up, peak learning rate of λ = 2 ∗ 10 −4 for Transformers and λ = 5 ∗ 10 −4 for Mixers (tuned to each model), and with a linear decay for the duration of training, and nctx = 512 was used for the context window unless otherwise noted. Causal full-context models, memory models, and autoencoders were typically trained with a global b = 128 batch size via torch-native distributed data parallel. Models with a context window of nctx = 1024 (as was typical for copy model training) were trained with a batch size of b = 64 . For variable-context LLM information retention tests, a constant total number of tokens trained by assigning the batch size to be a function of context length, b = ⌊32768 /n ctx ⌋, which equates to b = 64 for nctx = 512 .

Figure S1: Mixer and Transformer information retention validation training curve examples on FineWeb. Transformers are dm = 512 , h = 4 and mixers dm = 1024 non-headed, both with nctx = 512 , n l = 16 .

# S1.2 Pretrained LLM memory model training 

We benchmark for general question answering via Arc-Easy (Clark et al., 2018), sentence completion using HellaSwag (Zellers et al., 2019) and Lambada (OpenAI processed) (Paperno et al., 2016), and pretraining information retention via MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021) using Eleuther-AI’s evaluation harness (Gao et al., 2024). Before memory model training, the pretrained Llama 3.2 achieves the benchmark accuracies shown in Table S1, and after training for 32k steps the decoder’s benchmark accuracies are shown in Table S2. 14 Figure S2: Autoencoders and Memory Model Encoder distribution dependence. Left, Autoencoder and Memory Model generalization to OOD uniform random distribution inputs versus hold-out FineWeb in-distribution inputs. Right, Masked Mixer autoencoders do not learn to model uniform random inputs. Memory models are ‘oracle’ memory models where a full-context encoding is added to a causal decoder and trained for next token prediction, resulting in very small loss. Tasks Version Filter n-shot Metric Value Stderr arc_easy 1 none 0 acc ↑ 0.6633 ± 0.0097 none 0 acc_norm ↑ 0.6170 ± 0.0100 hellaswag 1 none 0 acc ↑ 0.4805 ± 0.0050 none 0 acc_norm ↑ 0.6427 ± 0.0048 lambada_openai 1 none 0 acc ↑ 0.6222 ± 0.0068 none 0 perplexity ↓ 5.4344 ± 0.1288 mmlu 2 none acc ↑ 0.3775 ± 0.0040 - humanities 2 none acc ↑ 0.3515 ± 0.0069 - other 2 none acc ↑ 0.4303 ± 0.0088 - social sciences 2 none acc ↑ 0.4030 ± 0.0087 - stem 2 none acc ↑ 0.3394 ± 0.0083 Table S1: Llama 3.2 (1b) benchmarks before copy memory training. 15 Figure S3: Autoencoder and Memory Model (oracle) encoder generalization. Models were trained on FineWeb-edu with FineMath 4+ used for marginally out-of-distribution samples. 

Figure S4: Fixed versus variable position memory Transformer training on FineWeb. 16 Figure S5: Parallel and recurrent memory model training efficiency on FineWeb. Tasks Version Filter n-shot Metric Value Stderr arc_easy 1 none 0 acc ↑ 0.6646 ± 0.0097 none 0 acc_norm ↑ 0.5976 ± 0.0101 hellaswag 1 none 0 acc ↑ 0.4638 ± 0.0050 none 0 acc_norm ↑ 0.6159 ± 0.0049 lambada_openai 1 none 0 acc ↑ 0.5960 ± 0.0068 none 0 perplexity ↓ 6.4017 ± 0.1668 mmlu 2 none acc ↑ 0.2872 ± 0.0038 - humanities 2 none acc ↑ 0.2837 ± 0.0066 - other 2 none acc ↑ 0.3238 ± 0.0083 - social sciences 2 none acc ↑ 0.2912 ± 0.0082 - stem 2 none acc ↑ 0.2525 ± 0.0077 Table S2: Llama 3.2 (1b) Memory Model Decoder benchmark evaluations at 32k copy training steps. 17 Figure S6: Llama 3.1 (1b) decoder memory model copy training. Models are nctx = 256 , s = 4 with 512 tokens copied from FineWeb sampled inputs. 18 Figure S7: Memory model ( nctx = 512 , s = 4 chunks) causal training on FineWeb. 

Figure S8: Blank Copy Training on FineWeb, 512 copy tokens, dm = 512 , n l = 16 , n ctx = 1024 

Figure S9: Memory Model Training on FineWeb, Masked Mixer encoder and Transformer decoder ( nctx =512 , s = 4 , d m = 512 , n l = 16 ). 19