Title: Mind the Style: Impact of Communication Style on Human-Chatbot Interaction

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.17850v1

Published Time: Mon, 23 Feb 2026 01:09:49 GMT

Number of Pages: 52

Markdown Content:
# Mind the Style: Impact of Communication Style on Human-Chatbot Interaction 

Erik Derner a,b , Dalibor Kučera c, Aditya Gulati a, Ayoub Bagheri d, Nuria Oliver a

> aELLIS Alicante, Alicante, Spain
> bCzech Technical University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic
> cUniversity of South Bohemia, České Budějovice, Czech Republic
> dUtrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands

Abstract 

Conversational agents increasingly mediate everyday digital interactions, yet the effects of their communication style on user experience and task success remain unclear. Addressing this gap, we describe the results of a between-subject user study where participants interact with one of two versions of a chatbot called 

NAVI which assists users in an interactive map-based 2D navigation task. The two chatbot versions differ only in communication style: one is friendly and supportive, while the other is direct and task-focused. Our results show that the friendly style increases subjective satisfaction and significantly improves task completion rates among female participants only, while no baseline differ-ences between female and male participants were observed in a control condition without the chatbot. Furthermore, we find little evidence of users mimicking the chatbot’s style, suggesting limited linguistic accommodation. These findings highlight the importance of user- and task-sensitive conversational agents and support that communication style personalization can meaningfully enhance in-teraction quality and performance. 

Keywords: conversational agents, communication style, generative AI 

1. Introduction 

Conversational agents are increasingly used for task-oriented assistance, in-cluding in navigation, learning and decision-making scenarios [1, 2]. Their ef-fectiveness depends not only on informational accuracy but also on the manner in which they communicate. Subtle stylistic cues such as tone, politeness and warmth influence user trust, satisfaction and engagement, making communica-tion style an important design variable in human–AI interaction [3, 4, 5, 6]. Social Response Theory proposes that people apply social norms to tech-nologies that display human-like cues, even when they know that the system is artificial [7, 8]. Thus, linguistic style functions as a social signal that shapes 

> arXiv:2602.17850v1 [cs.HC] 19 Feb 2026

the users’ affective reactions and expectations. Communication Accommoda-tion Theory complements this view by explaining how interlocutors adjust their linguistic behavior ( e.g., lexical choices, use of pronouns, affective expressions, levels of directness, or temporal/numerical references), to manage affiliation, reduce social distance or express identity [9, 10]. Expectancy-based models additionally suggest that deviations from anticipated communication style can influence affiliation and reciprocity [11]. These frameworks imply that stylis-tic variation in conversational agents affects how interactions are perceived and evaluated, shaping impressions of warmth, competence, social presence, and trust, and also eliciting linguistic alignment or accommodation [12]. Furthermore, prior research has shown that the stylistic appropriateness of conversational agents is context-dependent: informal or friendly styles can increase social presence, yet may also be perceived as unsuitable in highly goal-directed tasks [13]. Moreover, perceived “human-likeness” in conversational agents appears to rely less on warmth than on clarity, consistency and linguis-tic precision [14]. While previous research has examined dimensions such as empathy, politeness and anthropomorphism in conversational agents [15], rela-tively few studies have systematically isolated fixed stylistic tone in controlled, goal-oriented tasks where performance can be objectively measured while in-formational content is held constant. Moreover, it remains unclear whether linguistic accommodation emerges in short, tightly constrained interactions, or whether user characteristics –such as gender or prior experience with conver-sational agents– moderate the effects of communication style. Recent findings further suggest that user responses to stylistic variation depend on contextual appropriateness and the users’ awareness of interacting with an artificial agent [16], underscoring the need for controlled experimental evidence. In this paper, we focus on chatbots as one class of conversational agents. We investigate how a chatbot’s communication style influences task performance, interaction behavior, and subjective user evaluations within a controlled map-based 2D navigation task. To this end, we design two stylistic variants of a chatbot, NAVI : a friendly and supportive style ( NAVI f ) and a direct, task-focused style ( NAVI d). These two styles are compared against a control condition in which participants complete the task without NAVI ’s assistance. In addition, we investigate whether users linguistically accommodate to the chatbot’s commu-nication style and whether such effects are moderated by individual differences, including prior experience with chatbots and gender. This analysis is motivated by previous research reporting gender-related differences in relational versus instrumental orientations toward technology. Thus, our contributions are threefold: (1) we provide evidence on how fixed stylistic tone shapes relational and instrumental outcomes in a measurable, con-trolled and goal-oriented task; (2) we analyze feature-specific linguistic accom-modation in short, task-focused dialogues; and (3) we present a moderated account of user experience, showing how prior chatbot use and gender influence the interaction, with implications for the design of inclusive and socially attuned conversational agents. The rest of the paper is structured as follows: we provide a summary of the 2most relevant related work and formulate the research questions that drive our research in Section 2. Our user study and its results are presented in Section 3 and Section 4, respectively. We provide a discussion of our findings in Section 5, followed by limitations and future work in Section 6, and conclusion in Section 7. 

2. Related work 

2.1. Communication style in conversational agents 

Research in HCI demonstrates that users respond socially to systems that employ human-like cues [7, 8]. Conversational style, defined as the tone, polite-ness and affective framing used in dialogue, influences the users’ perceptions of a conversational agent’s personality, appropriateness and competence [4, 17, 18]. Friendly or warm styles tend to increase perceived social presence and relational engagement, whereas more direct or task-focused tones may enhance perceived clarity or efficiency but reduce warmth [3, 19, 20]. Empirical evidence also shows that stylistic effectiveness depends on contextual appropriateness: informal or friendly styles can increase social presence but may be judged as unsuitable in instrumental, task-oriented contexts [13], and perceived humanness in task-oriented chatbots is often driven by linguistic precision rather than emotional expressiveness [14]. These findings suggest that stylistic variation primarily shapes how interactions are perceived and evaluated, rather than uniformly im-proving instrumental task outcomes. Whether such perceptual effects extend be-yond subjective evaluations to influence task success therefore remains an open empirical question. From a socio-cognitive perspective, warmth (benevolence, friendliness) and competence (capability, reliability) are the two central dimen-sions of social judgment [21]. In human–AI interaction, warmth has been linked to affective trust and satisfaction, while competence fosters performance-related trust [22, 23]. Stylistic choices therefore modulate both relational and instru-mental processes relevant for task-oriented collaboration. The broader quality of communication experience, i.e., clarity, responsiveness and relational cues, offers an additional framework for understanding stylistic effects [24]. Thus, previous research highlights a fundamental trade-off between relational and instrumen-tal communication goals, underscoring the need for controlled experiments that isolate stylistic variation while keeping task content constant. In addition, most existing work has examined adaptive, affective or multi-modal agents [25, 26]. Far less attention has been given to fixed, non-adaptive styles in controlled tasks where objective outcomes can be measured, despite calls in the literature to systematically investigate how static communicative design choices impact interaction [27, 28]. This limits our understanding of how stylistic tone alone shapes the users’ subjective evaluations of the inter-action, and whether such effects extend to task performance. Recent findings also suggest that the users’ knowledge of interacting with a chatbot vs a hu-man influences their evaluation of style [16], further underscoring the need for experimentally isolating stylistic tone. 32.2. Social alignment and linguistic accommodation 

Communication Accommodation Theory (CAT) describes how individuals adjust lexical, syntactic and paralinguistic behavior to manage affiliation or distinction [9, 10]. Evidence of linguistic alignment with artificial interlocu-tors has been observed in text-based and voice-based interactions, including mirroring of pronouns, affective expressions, and syntactic structures; however, such accommodation is often selective and feature-specific rather than reflect-ing global stylistic convergence [29]. Expectancy-driven models propose that communicative behaviors are shaped by anticipated interactional norms; align-ment or compensation depends on whether the agent’s style confirms or violates these expectations [11]. Congruence between agent tone and user expectations strengthens rapport and social presence, whereas mismatches can hinder co-operation [30, 4, 31]. However, most empirical findings stem from longer or multimodal interactions. It remains unclear whether accommodation emerges in short, goal-oriented text exchanges in which users focus primarily on perfor-mance. Understanding such micro-level adaptation is necessary for designing conversational agents that support both efficiency and social appropriateness. 

2.3. Gender and relational orientation in HCI 

Sociolinguistic and psychological research consistently finds gender differ-ences in communication goals. Women typically adopt relational and affiliative orientations, responding more strongly to warmth, empathy and politeness cues, whereas men often prioritize instrumental aspects such as efficiency or control [32, 33]. In technology use, women tend to be more sensitive to socially expres-sive interfaces, while men evaluate systems more through usefulness and ease of use [34, 35]. Studies further show that women experience higher social presence and relational engagement with polite or friendly agents [30], suggesting that communication style may interact with gender to shape satisfaction and trust. Yet few controlled experiments have examined this moderation in task-focused settings where style, performance and accommodation are assessed jointly. Ex-isting literature demonstrates that communication style influences social per-ception and trust, linguistic alignment can facilitate rapport, and gender may moderate the interpretation of relational cues. However, these processes have rarely been tested together in a unified experimental design that simultaneously evaluates relational outcomes, instrumental outcomes and linguistic behavior. The present study addresses this gap. 

2.4. Effects of prior chatbot experience on expectations and evaluations 

Beyond immediate stylistic cues, prior experience with conversational agents may also shape how users perceive and evaluate chatbot interaction. Users with extensive prior experience tend to develop more calibrated mental models of the system’s capabilities, which can lead to higher task efficiency but also more critical assessments of system performance and language quality [29]. In con-trast, less experienced users often attribute greater intelligence or intentionality to chatbots, resulting in higher initial satisfaction but also increased risk of 4expectation violation when system limitations become apparent [36]. These dif-ferences suggest that prior chatbot experience functions as an important mod-erating variable in how communication style and system behavior are perceived. Empirical studies further indicate that prior experience influences how users evaluate conversational style, social presence, and trustworthiness. Experienced users are more likely to prioritize efficiency, clarity and goal alignment over relational or anthropomorphic cues, whereas novice users may respond more positively to friendly or supportive language that scaffolds the interaction and reduces uncertainty [16]. Moreover, experience-related differences can affect the users’ willingness to adapt their own language, with experienced users show-ing less linguistic accommodation and greater reliance on concise, task-oriented commands [37, 38]. Finally, longitudinal evidence suggests that repeated expo-sure and regular interactions with conversational agents systematically influence perceptions such as trust, dialogue quality, and anthropomorphism, as well as interaction-related behavior [39]. These findings highlight that the users’ prior experience with chatbots consti-tutes an important background factor that may condition responses to stylistic variation, even in single, non-adaptive interactions. Such prior experience may not only shape subjective evaluations of stylistic cues, but also influence how users engage with and perform in guided task settings. 

2.5. Research Questions 

Guided by Social Response Theory, Communication Accommodation Theory and socio-cognitive models of warmth and competence, the present study ex-amines how fixed communication style affects user performance and experience when other interactional factors are held constant. In particular, we investigate the following research questions: 

RQ1 - Communication style and user outcomes. How does a chatbot’s commu-nication style (friendly vs. direct) influence task performance and satisfaction in a goal-oriented map-based 2D navigation task? This question targets both relational and instrumental effects of stylistic tone. 

RQ2 – Moderation by user characteristics. Do user characteristics, such as gen-der and previous chatbot experience, moderate the influence of communication style on task and experience measures? Given the distinct relational versus in-strumental orientations reported in prior work, we examine potential differential sensitivity to stylistic tone. 

RQ3 – Linguistic accommodation. Do users linguistically adapt to the chat-bot’s communication style during short, task-focused interactions? By analyzing lexical and stylistic features in user messages, we test whether feature-specific accommodation emerges even in constrained exchanges. We address these three research questions by means of a between-subject user study designed to evaluate communication style as both a social cue and a functional design parameter, and to assess its interaction with user characteris-tics and linguistic behavior. 53. User study 

3.1. Task: Map-based 2D navigation as a testbed for communication style 

Navigation tasks offer a structured environment for examining how users integrate external guidance into goal-oriented action. Unlike open-ended con-versational settings, map-based 2D navigation constrains both the problem and the interaction space, thereby allowing stylistic tone to be manipulated indepen-dently of content and task structure. Prior work suggests that navigation per-formance is sensitive to cue structure, time pressure, and the degree of required initiative, e.g., distinguishing stepwise instruction-following from dialogue-based exploration [40, 41]. A controlled navigation task therefore offers a tractable experimental paradigm to study communication style as the primary independent variable, while hold-ing constant task complexity, interaction modality, and informational content. To this end, we designed a map-based 2D navigation task in which participants were required to locate a predefined target destination (the embassy) using con-cise, content-equivalent textual guidance (See Fig. 3). Two chatbot conditions were implemented that differed exclusively in com-municative style (friendly vs. direct), while preserving identical task instruc-tions, semantic content and goal structure. This design enables the isolation of stylistic effects on user performance and perception without confounding influ-ences from task demands or informational variability. In addition, we included a control condition in which participants received only step-by-step navigation instructions without interacting with a chatbot. This control condition served two purposes: it provided a baseline level of task performance in the absence of conversational interaction; and it allowed us to confirm that the navigation task itself did not systematically provide an ad-vantage to particular user profiles. Note that the control condition was not intended to serve as a stylistic baseline, but rather as a validation of the task environment. Thus, comparisons between the two chatbot conditions allow for a focused assessment of the impact of communication style while holding all other task characteristics constant. 

3.2. Design 

We used a between-subjects experimental design, depicted in Figure 1. The study consisted of two parts: (1) a navigation task and (2) a post-task survey that collected subjective feedback regarding communication quality, satisfaction, user experience and preferences for chatbot versus human assistance. Measures are described in detail in 3.7, and full item wordings are provided in Appendix B. 

3.2.1. Map-based 2D navigation task 

Participants were instructed to imagine arriving at the train station of a capital city where they had never been before. They realized that they did not have their phone and documents with them, so they needed to urgently reach their country’s embassy. Their task was to figure out where the embassy was located by navigating from the train station to the embassy on a 2D map. 6Figure 1: Overview of the study design. Participants completed a fictional map-based 2D navigation task to locate an embassy on a map (top). They followed static instructions (Control ) or they interacted with one of the two versions of the chatbot NAVI , differing only in the communication style: Friendly (supportive, warm) or Direct (concise, task-focused). Both objective and subjective measures (bottom-left) were collected to address three research questions (bottom-right). 

The interface displayed a static city map with streets, buildings and a large lake, together with a legend and compass rose indicating cardinal directions. Streets were represented by light grey lines that could be used for walking, the lake could not be crossed and the starting position at the train station was marked with a red square. A detailed explanation of the interface provided par-ticipants with all necessary information about the map layout, clickable elements and interaction flow, as can be seen in Figure 2. 

Control condition (no chatbot). In the control condition, participants received step-by-step written instructions guiding them from the train station to the embassy. The full set of instructions is provided in Appendix C. The interface showed a static 2D city map on the left and a panel with navigation instructions on the right, as depicted in Figure 2. Participants clicked a button to reveal the next instruction in sequence and were asked to follow these instructions on the map until they believed they had identified the embassy. The layout and visual elements were matched as closely as possible to the chatbot interface to ensure that the main difference between conditions was the presence of a conversational agent rather than differences in visual design or information structure. 

Chatbot condition ( NAVI ). In the chatbot condition, participants were intro-duced to NAVI , a ChatGPT-based conversational agent with local knowledge that could help them find the embassy. NAVI was embedded in a custom web interface that combined a chat window on the right with the same static 2D city map on the left, as illustrated in Figure 3. Participants were told that they could ask NAVI for directions and clarifications in order to locate the embassy. 7Figure 2: Explanations of the user interface presented to the participants in the control condition, including the map legend. 

Upon entering the chatbot branch of the study, participants were randomly assigned to one of two stylistic variants of NAVI :

• Friendly NAVI (NAVI f ), which was configured to use a warm, polite and supportive tone. It offered encouragement, reiterated instructions when participants appeared confused and occasionally added brief local tips (for example, comments about landmarks) when appropriate. The intention was to create an inviting conversational atmosphere that emphasized social presence and support while keeping the informational content aligned with the task. 

• Direct NAVI (NAVI d), which provided brief, task-focused responses that were efficient and to the point. This version avoided social niceties, did not offer local tips or spontaneous clarifications and did not explicitly en-courage the user. The goal was to maximize clarity and efficiency without deliberately fostering a socially engaging interaction. Participants were not informed which version of NAVI they were interacting with, and both versions followed the same underlying navigation route from the train station to the embassy. In all chatbot conditions, NAVI ’s behavior was con-trolled by style-specific system prompts, which specified communicative goals, politeness level, affective tone and constraints on content. The exact wording of the system prompts for NAVI f and NAVI d is provided in Appendix A. To ensure that the manipulation targeted communication style rather than informational content, we constrained the chatbot to reveal a fixed route step by step. The sequence of directions and landmarks was held constant across both styles, and 

NAVI was instructed to avoid giving away the answer directly, for example, by naming the embassy building number. 8Figure 3: Explanations of the user interface used by the participants to interact with NAVI .

Because the underlying model is generative, individual responses could still exhibit some stochastic variability. To verify that the stylistic manipulation was stable and implemented as intended, we later profiled NAVI ’s utterances using the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) dictionary and complementary embedding-based measures (see Section 3.7). These analyses confirmed that the friendly and direct versions displayed distinct and consistent patterns in affective and relational categories, while within-style variation remained low relative to between-style differences. Participants interacted with NAVI via the chat interface to obtain directions from the starting point (the train station) to the target (embassy). The interface displayed a timer that became visible only when the remaining time dropped below three minutes, and this timer updated whenever participants sent a mes-sage. In the instructions, participants were told that, on average, six to eight conversational turns were usually needed to locate the embassy. To discour-age attempts to solve the task without meaningful interaction, a minimum of three user– NAVI turns were enforced before participants could submit their final answer with the location of the embassy. In both the control and chatbot conditions, participants indicated that they had reached a decision by clicking a button located below the map on the left-hand side of the interface with the label “I know where the embassy is” . Once they clicked this button, numbers from 1 to 15 appeared over all buildings on the map. Participants were then asked to select the number corresponding to the building they believed to be the embassy. Feedback about correctness was not provided at any point to avoid learning or feedback effects. The navigation task had a maximum duration of eight minutes. If a par-ticipant had not submitted an answer by the end of this period, the task was terminated and the participant was automatically advanced to the post-task survey. The eight-minute limit was chosen based on pilot data, which indicated 9that this duration was sufficient for participants to complete the task under normal circumstances while still imposing a realistic sense of time pressure. 

3.2.2. Post-task survey 

After completing the navigation task and selecting the embassy building, participants proceeded to a post-task survey. The survey captured subjective evaluations of the interaction and provided additional context for interpreting objective task measures. In the chatbot conditions, participants completed a questionnaire with ran-domized block order and embedded attention checks. The survey contained questions about perceived communication quality and satisfaction, perceived usefulness of NAVI for accomplishing the task, and preferences for interacting with a chatbot versus a human in similar situations. It also captured chatbot use frequency to contextualize individual differences in user experience. The com-plete set of survey items, including the wording and response scales, is provided in Appendix B, and all derived measures are described in Section 3.7. In the control condition, participants completed a shorter post-task survey that did not include communication quality items, since they had not interacted with a conversational agent. Instead, they evaluated their satisfaction with the written instructions, their preference for receiving directions from a human versus written instructions, their preference for using a chatbot instead of static instructions and their chatbot use frequency. The corresponding items for the control condition are listed in Appendix B (control survey section), again with measures described in Section 3.7. 

3.3. Implementation 

The study was implemented using Streamlit, an open-source Python frame-work for interactive web applications. Streamlit allowed us to integrate instruc-tions, the map interface, the chat window and the post-task survey within a single application, which reduced context switching for participants and simpli-fied logging of interaction data. The application was hosted on Microsoft Azure, which provided scalable and reliable access for Prolific participants. Azure stor-age was used to securely log each participant’s progression through the study, including navigation behavior, chat transcripts and survey responses. The chat-bot was powered by the gpt-4.1-2025-04-14 model via the OpenAI API, which served as the backbone for generating NAVI’s responses. The study was in-tegrated with Prolific’s recruitment and screening tools, enabling automatic enforcement of inclusion criteria and controlled access to the study link. Participants were randomly assigned by the web application to one of the three experimental conditions (control, friendly NAVI , direct NAVI ). Within the chatbot branch, assignment to friendly versus direct NAVI was based on simple random allocation with equal target probability. To maintain approximately equal numbers of women and men in each condition, we additionally moni-tored recruitment through Prolific’s prescreening and quota tools and adjusted ongoing recruitment so that gender distributions remained balanced across con-ditions. 10 3.4. Pilot studies 

To refine the study design and ensure a smooth user experience, we con-ducted three iterative pilot studies on Prolific, each with 10 participants. After each pilot, we examined navigation performance, chat transcripts and survey re-sponses, and adjusted the interface and protocol accordingly. Several key design choices were informed by these pilots: 

• We introduced a minimum number of required conversational turns, be-cause early pilots showed that some participants tried to guess the embassy location without interacting meaningfully with NAVI .

• We refined the time estimates and compensation to align with the actual time needed to complete the task and survey, and we updated the informa-tion provided to participants so that expectations about study duration were realistic. 

• We clarified and streamlined the instructions, including the narrative sce-nario, explanation of the interface and examples of how to ask NAVI for help. 

• We adjusted the color scheme and contrast of the map to improve read-ability and reduce visual ambiguity. While the map layout (landmark positions) and the style-specific system prompts were initially developed through exploratory prototyping, both were fixed prior to the pilot phase and remained unchanged across all pilot and main study sessions. The final version of the instructions shown to participants is included in Appendix C. 

3.5. Sample size and power considerations 

Before data collection, we conducted a priori power considerations to deter-mine the sample size. Prior work on stylistic manipulations in conversational agents typically reports effects in the small-to-medium range on relational out-comes such as trust and satisfaction, with Cohen’s d values often between 0.25 

and 0.40 . Assuming a two-sided α of .05 and desired power of .80 , a medium effect (d ≈ 0.50 ) can be detected with about 64 participants per group, whereas detecting a lower-medium effect (d ≈ 0.30 ) requires larger groups of around n = 170–180 participants per condition. For correlations between linguistic indicators and subjective evaluations, similar calculations show that medium correlations (r ≈ 0.30 ) require approximately n = 80–90 participants, while smaller correlations (r ≈ 0.20 ) require about n = 190–200 participants. An-ticipating effects in the small-to-medium range and aiming to support both between-condition comparisons and exploratory analyses of linguistic alignment and gender moderation, we targeted a total sample of approximately 450 to 500 

participants distributed across the three conditions. The final sample of 470 

participants (see 3.8) thus provides adequate sensitivity for detecting stylistic effects of theoretical interest and sufficient stability for the text-based analyses. 11 3.6. Ethical approval 

The full study protocol, including recruitment, consent materials, data han-dling and debriefing procedures, was reviewed and approved by the ethics com-mittee of one of the authors’ institutions (anonymized for review). The com-mittee concluded that the project complied with institutional regulations and international standards for research with human participants. All participants provided informed consent prior to beginning the study and were compensated in line with Prolific guidelines and the estimated study duration.      

> (a) Friendly NAVI (b) Direct NAVI
> Figure 4: Excerpts of exemplary conversations with the friendly (left) and direct (right) versions of NAVI .

3.7. Measures 

We collected objective indicators of task performance and interaction behav-ior, self-reported evaluations of the interaction, and linguistic measures captur-ing structural, stylistic and affective aspects of the interaction. This combina-tion of measures was designed to address our three research questions by jointly characterizing instrumental outcomes (task success and persistence), relational outcomes (satisfaction) and linguistic accommodation. 

3.7.1. Objective Measures 

We collected the following objective measures: 

1. Task performance , defined as a binary indicator of whether participants correctly identified the embassy building at the end of the navigation task. This measure directly captures the primary instrumental outcome of the guidance and provides a simple, interpretable criterion for comparing conditions. 

2. Interaction behavior , measured by the number of conversational turns between the participant and NAVI , the number of explicit help requests and the total time spent on the navigation task. Because reaction-time data collected in uncontrolled online environments are often noisy, we treated time as a sec-ondary contextual measure rather than a primary efficiency metric. The main behavioral indicators were therefore the extent of conversational engagement (number of turns) and reliance on the guidance (number of help requests). 12 3. Linguistic measures , to assess linguistic accommodation, consisting of three variables that measure structural (length), stylistic (embedding-based) and affective (valence) dimensions of linguistic alignment. 1. Message length alignment , measured by the difference in average message length between the messages produced by NAVI and those generated by the participant. Note that convergence in word count is a standard structural marker of linguistic alignment. 2. Stylistic similarity in the embedding space , quantified using cosine dis-tances between the participant’s and NAVI ’s utterances in sentence-level style embeddings developed by Wegmann et al. [42], which capture stylis-tic features independently of topical content. 3. Overlap in positively valenced vocabulary . As NAVI f was designed to use more positively valenced wording than NAVI d, we computed the overlap in affectively positive words using a RoBERTa-based valence estimation model [43]. Words with valence > 0.6 were classified as positively valenced. Furthermore, a descriptive lexical analysis of utterances using Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count dictionary (LIWC) [44] was conducted to document the linguistic patterns of the language used by both NAVI and the participants. LIWC assigns words to psychologically meaningful categories ( e.g., pronouns, affect, cognition). Importantly, LIWC was not used as an inferential test of accommodation but as a transparent, replicable description of the linguistic material for future comparisons using dictionary-based analysis tools. 

3.7.2. Subjective Measures 

Subjective measures were collected by means of questionnaires that were delivered after the task was completed and targeted relational and instrumental aspects of the interaction. The questionnaires were structured in two Blocks: 

1. Block A. In the chatbot conditions, subjective satisfaction and quality in the communication with the chatbot were evaluated by means of the Interper-sonal Communication Satisfaction Inventory (ICSI) [45], consisting of a 19-item, seven-point Likert scale questionnaire. It was created through systematic item generation, empirical testing, and psychometric validation. Studies demonstrate high reliability ( α = .90–.97) and good convergent validity (.64–.87), supporting its use as a largely unidimensional measure of global communication satisfac-tion. For our study, the inventory was adapted by replacing the term “other person” with the chatbot identifier NAVI . Sample items include: “NAVI let me know I was communicating effectively” , “The conversation flowed smoothly” , and 

“I was satisfied with the conversation” . The full list of questions can be found in Appendix B. The questionnaire covers aspects such as emotional engagement, turn-taking, responsiveness, and mutual understanding, while also embedding reverse-coded items and two attention checks. The adapted ICSI provided a ro-bust measure of subjective interaction quality to complement task performance outcomes when comparing NAVI ’s friendly versus direct chatbot communication styles. The ICSI score was calculated following the scoring key from [45]. 13 Note that this block was omitted for participants in the control condition, as they did not interact with a chatbot and, therefore, had no communicative elements to evaluate. 

2. Block B. In addition, participants were asked to provide feedback about their user experience and preferences by means of four 7-point Likert questions. In the chatbot conditions, the questions were: (1) Perceived naturalness ,assessed by how human-like and fluent the conversation went ( “The conversation felt natural and human-like". ); (2) Task helpfulness , measured by how effectively 

NAVI supported the user in completing the task ( “NAVI helped me solve the task effectively". ); (3) Human preference , which was captured by the users’ subjective evaluation and overall preference for interacting with a human instead of with a chatbot ( “I would have preferred to ask a human". ); and (4) Chatbot familiarity ,which measured the participants’ prior experience and familiarity with chatbots, providing context for interpreting their responses ( “How frequently do you use chatbots?” ). In the control condition, the four 7-point Likert questions were: (1) Satisfac-tion with the instructions ( “I am satisfied with how the instructions conveyed the information on how to get to the embassy" ); (2) Human preference , which was captured by the participants’ overall preference for interacting with a human in-stead of receiving the instructions in a step-by-step written form ( “I would have preferred receiving the instructions to get to the embassy from a human rather than in written form". ); (3) Chatbot preference , which was captured by the par-ticipants’ overall preference for interacting with a chatbot instead of receiving the instructions ( “I would have preferred to ask a chatbot for help rather than follow written instructions". ); and (4) Chatbot familiarity which measured the participants’ prior experience and familiarity with chatbots, providing context for interpreting their responses ( “How frequently do you use chatbots?” ). 

3. Attention checks. Furthermore, there were two attention checks, one per block, presented in the middle of the block, where participants were asked to select a specific option on the Likert scale ( e.g. , “For this question, ignore all the instructions and select ‘Disagree’.” ). Participants had to pass both attention checks to be included in the study. Appendix B contains all the questions that participants responded to in this part of the study. 

3.8. Participants 

Participants were recruited via Prolific and were required to be based in the United States. We obtained a gender-balanced sample and restricted partici-pation to individuals with an approval rate between 85–100% on Prolific. To minimize potential confounds, we further limited the sample to neurotypical individuals whose first language was English, excluding those reporting neuro-diversity, dyslexia, or vision impairments. After applying exclusion criteria for failed attention checks and statistical outliers, a total of 470 valid participants took part in the study. The control 14 condition included 158 participants (79 female, 79 male). The chatbot condition included 312 participants, divided between two versions of NAVI : the direct version (N = 157, 78 female, 79 male) and the friendly version (N = 155, 78 female, 77 male). The resulting sample size aligns with our a priori target (see Section 3.5) and provides reasonable sensitivity for detecting small-to-medium stylistic effects as well as stable estimation in the linguistic analyses. Gender representation was approximately balanced in each condition. The target compensation was set to USD 12 per hour, following Prolific’s fair-pay guidelines. From the pilot studies, we estimated the study to take 12 minutes in the chatbot condition and 5 minutes in the control condition. On average, participants completed the study in 10 minutes in the chatbot conditionand in 6 minutes in the control condition. All participants provided informed consent before starting the study. 

4. Results 

In this section, we present the results of analyzing the data collected in the user study to address the research questions formulated in Section 2.5 by means of the collected measures. For all statistical analyses, the significance threshold was set at α = 0 .05 . Prior to conducting comparisons, the normality of the dis-tributions was assessed using the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, and the homogene-ity of variances was evaluated with Levene’s test. When both assumptions were satisfied, independent samples t-tests were applied; otherwise, non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis and Mann–Whitney tests were used. The results reported below provide the empirical basis for our discussion of the broader implications, which we develop in Section 5. 

4.1. RQ1: Communication style and user outcomes 

Table 2 depicts the linear regression conducted to examine whether commu-nication style predicted the ICSI scores i.e., the participants satisfaction with their conversation. The model was statistically significant, F(1, 310) = 10.28, p = 0.001, though it explained a modest proportion of variance (adjusted R2 =.029). 

> Table 1: Linear regression predicting ICSI score from communication style.

Predictor Estimate Std. Error t p

Intercept 95.860 1.321 72.56 < 2e-16 Style (Friendly) 6.011 1.874 3.21 .0015 Residual SD = 16.55; df = 310 Multiple R2 = .032; Adjusted R2 = .029; F (1, 310) = 10.28, p = .00148 

> Table 2: Linear regression fit to the ICSI scores provided by participants to assess whether communication style predicted their satisfaction with the conversation.

15 Participants interacting with NAVI f gave significantly higher ICSI scores than those interacting with NAVI d (b = 6.01, SE = 1.87, t = 3.21, p = 0.0015). Applying the model estimates, the predicted ICSI score increased from approx-imately 95.86 for NAVI d to 101.87 for NAVI f , an increase of about 6.3%. 

Predictor Estimate Std. Error z p

Intercept 0.4804 0.1642 2.93 0.0034 Style (Friendly) 0.6442 0.2487 2.59 0.0096 

Model fit: Null deviance = 388.34 (df = 311) Residual deviance = 381.50 (df = 310); AIC = 385.5 

> Table 3: Logistic regression predicting task success from communication style. The binomial model estimates the log probabilities.

Similarly, a binary logistic regression was performed to examine whether communication style predicted task success. Style was coded with the direct condition as the reference category. The reduced residual deviance, as indicated in Table 3 indicates that including style explained additional variance in task success. The effect of communication style was statistically significant. Participants exposed to NAVI f were more likely to succeed than those interacting with NAVI d, b = 0.64, SE = 0.25, z = 2.59, p < 0.01. Applying the inverse-logit transformation to the model coefficients indicated that the predicted probabil-ity of task success increased from approximately 0.62 in the direct condition to 

0.76 in the friendly style condition, representing about a 22% relative increase in the likelihood of success on the same task simply by changing the style of communication of NAVI. Overall, the two models indicate that participants were more satisfied when engaging with NAVI f , and, notably, they also exhibited higher task success rates in the friendly condition. 

4.2. RQ2: Moderation by user characteristics 

In this section, we study to which degree gender and previous experience with chatbots mediated differences in task performance and subjective satisfaction. To assess whether gender differences could be attributed to baseline variation in navigation ability –as suggested in prior literature [46, 47]– we conducted a control study in which participants did not interact with a chatbot but instead received step-by-step navigation instructions. 

4.2.1. Control study: baseline performance 

No significant differences in task success were observed between male and female participants ( χ2(1) = 0.442, p > 0.1, Cramer’s V = 0.053) in the control condition. However, gender did influence attitudes toward chatbot preference: 16 male participants expressed a significantly stronger preference for interacting with chatbots when compared to female participants (Mann–Whitney, W = 2548.5, p < 0.05). The lack of significant differences in task success between male and female participants in the control condition supports the ecological validity of our study design in the chatbot condition: the navigation task itself does not disadvan-tage male or female participants. Hence, potential gender-related differences observed in performance in the chatbot condition can be attributed to NAVI ’s communication style rather than to underlying disparities in navigation ability. 

4.2.2. Impact of gender and prior chatbot use frequency on task performance 

To assess whether the effect of communication style on task success varied by the participant’s gender, we first fit a model including only the additive effects of style and gender. In this simpler model, the friendly conversational style sig-nificantly increased the likelihood of task success (b = 0.64, SE = 0.25, z = 2.59, p < 0.01), whereas gender was not a significant predictor (p = 0.79). Since prior work indicates that men and women may respond differently to conversational tone, and because descriptive patterns hinted at potential differences in success rates across style × gender combinations, we next fit a model including the in-teraction between style and gender, along with prior chatbot use frequency as a covariate. The parameters of this logistic regression model are summarized in Table 4. Style was coded with the direct condition as the reference category and Gender was coded with Female as the reference category. 

Predictor Estimate Std. Error z p

Intercept 0.973 0.398 2.44 .015 Style (Friendly) 1.050 0.363 2.89 .004 Gender (Male) 0.427 0.335 1.28 .202 Chatbot use frequency -0.166 0.081 -2.06 .040 Style (Friendly) × Gender (Male) -0.747 0.506 -1.48 .140 Null deviance = 388.34 (df = 311); Residual deviance = 375.47 (df = 307) AIC = 385.47; N = 312 

> Table 4: Logistic regression predicting task success from communication style, gender, their interaction, and prior chatbot-use frequency.

The interaction model provided an improved fit relative to the null model (Null deviance = 388.34; Residual deviance = 375.47; AIC = 385.47). As seen earlier, participants interacting with NAVI f were significantly more likely to succeed than those interacting with NAVI d (b = 1.05, SE = 0.36, z = 2.89, p = 0.004). Gender alone again did not significantly predict task success (p = .20). Importantly, the style × gender interaction was not statistically significant (b = -0.75, SE = 0.51, z = -1.48, p = 0.14), indicating that the effect of communication style did not differ reliably between women and men at the model level. 17 Given theoretical interest in potential gender-specific responses, we never-theless conducted follow-up simple-effects contrasts using estimated marginal means from the interaction model. Among women, NAVI f led to markedly higher task success than the direct style, reflected in a significant contrast (Odds Ratio = 0.35 for direct/friendly; z = –2.89, p = 0.0038), indicating that women’s odds of success were nearly three times higher when interacting with the friendly version. Among men, however, the corresponding contrast was not significant (Odds Ratio = 0.74, z = –0.86, p = 0.388), suggesting that men’s success rates did not reliably differ across the two styles. These gender-specific patterns should be interpreted as exploratory follow-up findings rather than evidence of a confirmed moderation by gender. Prior chatbot use frequency (provided by participants as part of the post-task survey on a 7-point Likert scale) also had a significant impact on task performance. Interestingly, higher chatbot use frequency was associated with a reduced likelihood of success (b = -0.17, SE = 0.08, z = -2.06, p = 0.040). The implications of these findings are discussed in Section 5. 

4.2.3. Impact of gender on chatbot satisfaction 

To investigate which factors shaped the participants’ subjective satisfac-tion with the interaction, we fit a linear regression model predicting the ICSI scores from communication style, the participant’s gender, their interaction, self-reported chatbot use frequency, and task success. The model showed a clear effect of communication style: participants rated the conversation as sig-nificantly more satisfying when interacting with with NAVI f than with NAVI d (b = 6.81, SE = 2.61, t = 2.61, p = 0.009), corresponding to an increase of nearly 7 points on the ICSI scale. 

Predictor Estimate Std. Error t p

Intercept 85.13 3.25 26.23 <.001 Style (Friendly) 6.81 2.61 2.61 .009 Gender (Male) -2.97 2.57 -1.15 .249 Chatbot use frequency 2.57 0.58 4.42 <.001 Task success (TRUE vs. FALSE) 2.30 1.99 1.16 .248 Style (Friendly) × Sex (Male) -2.87 3.65 -0.79 .432 

> Table 5: Linear regression predicting ICSI satisfaction scores from communication style, gen-der, their interaction, chatbot-use frequency, and task success.

Chatbot-use frequency was also a strong positive predictor of satisfaction (b = 2.57, SE = 0.58, t = 4.42, p < 0.001), indicating that more frequent chatbot users tended to evaluate the interaction more favorably. In contrast, neither participant gender (b = -2.97, p = .25) nor task success (b = 2.30, p = 0.25) significantly predicted ICSI scores. To further clarify whether the effect of communication style on satisfaction differed between women and men, we examined simple-effects contrasts using 18 estimated marginal means. Among women, the friendly style yielded signifi-cantly higher satisfaction than the direct style, estimate = -6.81, SE = 2.61, t(306) = -2.61, p = 0.0094, indicating that women rated NAVI f approximately 7 points higher on the ICSI scale than NAVI d. Among men, the contrast between styles was not statistically significant, estimate = -3.94, SE = 2.57, t(306) = -1.54, p = 0.125, though the trend was in the same direction. These differences corroborate the regression findings by showing that the satisfaction benefit of the friendly style is driven primarily by women’s responses to the ICSI survey, whereas men show a smaller and non-significant increase. Although the style × gender interaction in the regression model did not reach significance, the simple-effects analysis illuminates the source of this pattern: women exhibit a reliably stronger preference for the friendly conversational style while there is no clear evidence of this effect in men. In sum and regarding gender, the effect of communication style did not differ between men and women at the model level, yet women’s odds of success were nearly three times higher when interacting with NAVI f

than with NAVI d. Furthermore, women were significantly more satisfied interacting with NAVI f than with NAVI d.Finally, higher chatbot use frequency was associated with a reduced like-lihood of success but higher satisfaction with the interaction. 

4.3. RQ3: Linguistic accommodation 

In addition to examining effects on task success and satisfaction, we assessed whether the participants’ communication behaviors varied as a function of the chatbot they interacted with. Specifically, we analyzed two behavioral indica-tors of conversational style: the average number of turns exchanged during the interaction and the average length of the participants’ messages. To evaluate whether these aspects of communication differed across chatbot conditions, we applied two complementary analytic approaches, allowing us to determine not only whether message volume changed but also whether there was evidence of linguistic accommodation in conversations participants had with different con-ditions of NAVI. 

4.3.1. Impact of chatbot communication style on conversation behavior 

To assess whether the manner in which participants communicated with the system differed across chatbot conditions, we analyzed both the number of chat messages exchanged and the average length of messages participants produced. First, a linear regression predicting message counts from communication style, participant gender, their interaction, chatbot use frequency, and task success revealed a significant overall model, F(5, 306) = 3.13, p = 0.009 (adjusted R2 =0.033). Neither communication style nor gender predicted how many messages participants sent (p > 0.44), and the style × sex interaction was also non-significant (p = 0.60). Chatbot use frequency likewise showed no relationship with message volume (p = 0.86). The only significant predictor was task success: 19 Predictor Estimate Std. Error t p

Intercept 11.86 0.84 14.06 <.001 Style (Friendly) 0.52 0.68 0.77 .441 Gender (Male) -0.29 0.67 -0.43 .666 Chatbot use frequency 0.03 0.15 0.18 .856 Task success (TRUE vs. FALSE) 1.83 0.52 3.54 <.001 Style (Friendly) × Sex (Male) -0.49 0.95 -0.52 .604 

> Table 6: Linear regression predicting the number of chat messages from communication style, gender, their interaction, chatbot-use frequency, and task success.

participants who successfully completed the navigation task sent, on average, 1.83 more messages than those who were unsuccessful (b = 1.83, SE = 0.52, t = 3.54, p < 0.001), suggesting that higher message counts primarily reflected deeper engagement with the task rather than differences attributable to style, gender, or chatbot use frequency. A complementary analysis examined whether the length of the participants’ messages varied across the same predictors. Across all models, no significant effects of communication style, participant gender, chatbot use frequency, task success, or the style × gender interaction emerged for average message length (p > 0.13). This indicates that while successful participants tended to send more messages overall, participants did not adjust the verbosity or phrasing of their individual messages in response to the chatbot’s communication style or their own demographic or performance characteristics. In sum, these analyses suggest that the participants’ communication be-haviors remained largely stable across chatbot conditions, with the number of conversational turns – but not average message length – varying as a function of task engagement rather than style-related adaptation. 

4.3.2. Linguistic accommodation 

To study the existence of linguistic accommodation we first examined surface-level measures of potential linguistic accommodation of the participants to 

NAVI ’s communication style, such as message length, stylistic similarities, and lexical overlap. Second, we conducted a more fine-grained linguistic analysis using Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) [48], which allowed us to capture grammatical and semantic convergence beyond surface metrics. 

Surface-level analysis. We investigated to which degree the conversation length, language style and word frequencies differed when participants interacted with 

NAVI f vs NAVI d.Regarding conversation length , even though NAVI f generated more words per turn than NAVI d, we did not identify any statistically significantly difference in the number of conversational turns and the mean length (in number of words) of the messages exchanged with the different versions of NAVI as indicated in 20 our analysis of RQ1 and RQ2. These results suggest an absence of linguistic accommodation from the perspective of message length. With respect to stylistic adaptation, we applied the sentence style embed-dings proposed by Wegmann et al. [42], and found no evidence that the par-ticipants styles were closer to that of the version of NAVI they interacted with. It remains unclear whether this outcome reflects limitations of the embeddings in capturing stylistic variation or a genuine lack of style convergence. Nonethe-less, the overall conclusion is that no evidence of stylistic accommodation was observed. Results of the tests conducted here can be found in Appendix D. Finally, concerning positively valenced word frequencies , NAVI f employed a slightly different vocabulary, incorporating more positively valenced words than 

NAVI d. To test whether participants adapted to this vocabulary, we extracted word vectors based on the most positive sentiment words and examined their usage overlap between NAVI and participants. While the analysis confirmed that 

NAVI f consistently displayed greater positivity than NAVI d, no clear evidence of lexical accommodation was found. In summary, although the two versions of NAVI differed in linguistic ex-pression, these differences did not appear to elicit corresponding changes in participants’ communicative behavior. This absence of accommodation may be attributable to the highly constrained task environment, the well-defined na-ture of the task, or the relatively short length of the interactions. Appendix D provides a detailed description of these analyses. The broader implications of these findings are discussed in Section 5. 

LIWC-based analysis. To complement the previously described surface-level analysis, we conducted a targeted linguistic analysis using LIWC to examine whether more fine-grained grammatical and semantic features revealed signs of convergence between NAVI and the participants. Statistical relationships between words were assessed using Spearman’s rank-order correlation coefficients ( ρ), with α set at 0.05 as in the previous analyses. This non-parametric approach allowed us to capture monotonic associations between NAVI ’s and the participants’ linguistic profiles while minimizing sensi-tivity to outliers. Prominent LIWC categories included grammatical markers (e.g. , pronouns, tense usage, numerical references) and semantic domains ( e.g. ,affective language, social references, work-related terms). Small to moderate positive correlations were observed between NAVI ’s and the participants’ utterances, particularly in the use of pronouns ( ρ = 0.249, p < 0.001), personal pronouns ( ρ = 0.306, p < 0.001), first-person singular forms (ρ = 0.290, p < 0.001), verbs ( ρ = 0.261, p < 0.001), and past tense ( ρ = 0.297, p < 0.001). Numerical expressions showed the strongest effect ( ρ = 0.386, p < 0.001), suggesting that participants tended to mirror NAVI ’s use of quantitative references. When broken down by style, NAVI d displayed stronger alignment overall, especially for numerical terms ( ρ = 0.402, p < 0.001), past tense ( ρ = 0.315, p < 0.001), and pronouns ( ρ = 0.267, p < 0.001). NAVI f revealed weaker but still 21 significant patterns, most notably in the use of past tense ( ρ = 0.241, p < 0.01) and numbers ( ρ = 0.357, p < 0.001). The analysis of the semantic categories further supported these findings. We observed an alignment in the use of affective words, with weak but significant correlations in the aggregated dataset ( ρ = 0.145, p < 0.01) and stronger effects in both the direct ( ρ = 0.415, p < 0.001) and friendly ( ρ = 0.237, p < 0.01) conditions. Positive emotion words accounted for most of this effect (aggregated: 

ρ = 0.142, p < 0.05; direct: ρ = 0.406, p < 0.001; friendly: ρ = 0.263, p < 0.001), while negative emotion words were more salient in the friendly condition ( ρ =0.231, p < 0.01) and appeared more weakly in the aggregated setting ( ρ = 0.156, p < 0.01). The strongest convergence across all analyses was found for work-related vocabulary, showing moderate to strong correlations in the aggregated (ρ = 0.425, p < 0.001), direct ( ρ = 0.564, p < 0.001), and, to a lesser extent, friendly ( ρ = 0.157, p < 0.05) settings. These results provide a more nuanced picture of linguistic accommodation: although participants did not exhibit broad stylistic or lexical accommodation, they did mirror NAVI ’s language in selected grammatical and semantic domains. This partial convergence suggests that adaptation is constrained to specific fea-tures rather than representing a complete shift in communication style. Com-plete descriptive statistics and detailed results are provided in Appendix E. Given the number of models and language-related analyses conducted, the results should be interpreted with an emphasis on consistent patterns across outcomes rather than isolated p-values. In sum, neither communication style, gender or chatbot use frequency predicted the number of messages sent by the participants. The only sig-nificant predictor was task success: participants who successfully com-pleted the navigation task sent more messages than those who were unsuccessful. Moreover, participants did not exhibit broad stylistic or lexical accommodation, but they did mirror NAVI ’s language in selected grammatical and semantic domains. 

5. Discussion 

In this section, we elaborate on several interrelated themes emerging from our study that provide a framework for interpreting the findings and contextu-alizing them within broader debates on human-chatbot interaction. Specifically, we interpret the findings in relation to RQ1 to RQ3 and focus on (i) how fixed stylistic tone relates to subjective satisfaction and task success; (ii) why the con-trol condition outperformed both chatbot variants in this specific task setting, and (iii) what the observed, feature-specific linguistic accommodation suggests about short, goal-oriented interactions. 22 5.1. Revisiting gendered navigation differences 

Our results reveal no significant gender differences in task performance under the control condition (without any chatbot), which is noteworthy given previ-ous research that has reported gender differences in navigation tasks, with men relying more on metric strategies ( e.g., cardinal directions) and women favor-ing landmark-based or route strategies [46, 49]. More recent research, however, suggests that such differences are highly context-dependent and can be moder-ated by task design, environmental cues, and motivational factors [47]. Recent studies further indicate that gender gaps may shrink under specific motivational or environmental conditions: for example, Schinazi et al. [50] showed that time pressure can eliminate female disadvantages in virtual navigation tasks, while Dahmani et al. [40] found that environments offering both landmark and metric cues result in comparable performance between men and women. The absence of a gender effect in our control condition therefore reflects a strength of the task design, which provided a balanced environment that did not favor one nav-igational strategy over another. Thus, the control condition can be seen as an example of good design practice: it allowed participants to draw on their respec-tive strengths while minimizing the impact of their weaknesses, establishing a task-specific neutral baseline against which the effects of NAVI ’s communication styles can be meaningfully evaluated. At the same time, this “neutral baseline” should be interpreted as a property of our particular 2D task: because the map was visible and visually informative, some participants may have relied on map cues ( e.g., icons, layout, and spatial constraints) to infer the target location with relatively limited need for dialogue. This means we should avoid generaliz-ing the control-condition pattern to real-world navigation or to tasks where the environment is not continuously visible or where the information is genuinely unavailable without guidance. Crucially, the central gender-related signal in our study does not concern baseline navigation performance, but rather the interac-tion between user characteristics and stylistic framing in the chatbot conditions. 

5.2. The limits of chatbots and techno-solutionism 

Within the chatbot conditions, the direct style most closely approximated the control condition. However, participants preferred and performed better with the friendly version of NAVI than with the direct one, yet neither outper-formed participants in the control condition, suggesting that the introduction of a conversational agent in the task at hand changes the dynamics in ways that are not necessarily beneficial for objective task performance, even when subjective evaluations of the interaction are more positive. One plausible ex-planation is interaction overhead: in a visually informative, low-ambiguity map task, formulating queries and processing conversational responses may impose additional cognitive and temporal costs compared to following stepwise writ-ten instructions. Prior work has reported that users often approach chatbots with different social expectations when compared to non-agent based systems [8, 29], which might partially explain this finding. Interestingly, scholars have suggested that conversational interfaces are beneficial over direct manipulation 23 when the task complexity is greatest, proposing navigation paths as one of the use cases where dialogue interfaces should have an advantage [51]. However, we do not find any supporting empirical evidence of this claim in the 2D fictional navigation task of our user study. The superior performance of participants in the control condition when com-pared to using NAVI underscores the need for caution in assuming that chatbots are universally helpful, particularly in tasks where information is already avail-able through a well-designed non-conversational interface. As previous critiques of techno-solutionism argue [52, 53], technological interventions should be care-fully evaluated not only for the effectiveness but also for broader considerations, including environmental cost, data privacy and appropriateness for the task at hand. In our study, an additional practical factor is that participants were in-structed to minimize conversational turns which may have constrained natural interaction and may also blur interpretation when conversational turns or re-lated interaction indicators are discussed as outcomes. We therefore interpret the control condition’s advantage conservatively as evidence that, in a visually rich 2D map task, adding a chatbot layer can introduce interaction overhead without clear performance gains, rather than as a general claim that chatbots are inferior for navigation overall. Chatbots may lead to higher levels of en-gagement and persistence in some contexts, but they are not a substitute for all forms of human-computer interaction, as illustrated by our findings. More precisely for this paper, our data support a narrower conclusion: chatbots are not universally helpful in structured, map-visible tasks where direct interaction already provides efficient access to relevant cues. 

5.3. Communication style matters for task success... 

Task success, measured as the correct identification of the embassy’s loca-tion, was significantly higher in the friendly than in the direct condition, indi-cating that stylistic tone can influence performance when users rely on conver-sational guidance. A plausible explanation is that the friendly framing provided more supportive, relational cues that encouraged continued engagement with the task ( e.g., sustained interaction, more opportunities to request clarification, and greater time spent working through the steps), which can be beneficial in multi-step guidance scenarios. Consistent with this hypothesis, participants preferred interacting with NAVI f . Furthermore, they engaged in more conver-sational turns and typed more words in their interactions with NAVI when they were successful at the task, irrespective of the condition, which could have in-creased their exposure to NAVI ’s communication style. At the same time, our results indicate that prior experience with chatbots systematically shaped user outcomes: higher chatbot-use frequency was associ-ated with greater subjective satisfaction but a lower likelihood of task success. This dissociation is consistent with prior work showing that repeated and fa-miliar interactions with conversational agents can enhance perceived quality, comfort, and relational evaluations without necessarily improving instrumental performance [39]. In parallel, frequent users may be more prone to over-reliance on automated guidance, relying on the agent’s recommendations while engaging 24 less in active verification against available task cues, a pattern known to increase the risk of accuracy costs in structured, low-ambiguity tasks [54, 55]. Our findings also resonate with recent evidence that the communication styles in conversational agents strongly influence user perceptions and behav-iors. For instance, Poivet et al. demonstrated in a narrative detective game that cooperative communication styles were associated with higher perceived warmth, greater user preference, and more engaging conversations, whereas ag-gressive styles elicited longer inputs and were more frequently associated with suspicion and negative judgments [56]. These results support a careful interpretation: a friendly style can improve subjective experience and may support task success in guidance-oriented con-texts, while overly direct styles may reduce engagement or perceived support. While we did not identify evidence of linguistic accommodation in our surface-level analysis, the larger number of turns among successful participants could have enabled them to differentiate better between communication styles and benefit from it. This finding aligns with theories of engagement, persistence and motivation in HCI research [57, 58], suggesting that relational cues, even if subtle, may scaffold user persistence in demanding tasks. It is also concordant with research in motivational psychology as social support and encouragement have been found to enhance self-efficacy and perseverance in problem-solving contexts [59]. Regarding conversational agents, social presence theory has re-ported that perceived warmth and responsiveness can increase trust and will-ingness to interact [15], which in turn may contribute to better outcomes in task success. Because our empirical measures are task success, satisfaction, and interaction behavior ( e.g., turns, help requests, and time on task), we frame this point in terms of sustained engagement and task-relevant interaction rather than unmeasured constructs. Another interpretation of this finding is that a friendly communication style may reduce the cognitive load in the interaction by framing the task as more collaborative than transactional. According to prior work on politeness and dialogue systems, supported feedback and mitigated directives can enhance the users’ willingness to continue interacting, even when facing obstacles [60]. 

5.4. ...especially for females 

A key finding from our study is that communication style significantly im-pacted task success of female participants who performed significantly better in the friendly than in the direct condition. Previous research has reported that women are often more responsive to relational cues – such as friendliness and encouragement – than men [32]. Research in social psychology also suggests that women may have a greater ability to recognize and benefit from supportive com-munication styles [61]. Similar preferences for cooperative communication styles have also been documented more generally across user groups, with participants reporting greater warmth, engagement, and conversational preference when in-teracting with cooperative rather than aggressive agents [56]. Thus, consistent with the literature, our findings point to a differential benefit of communication style by gender, supporting the value of personalization as an important design 25 principle for chatbot design, particularly in the context of 2D navigation tasks. Previous research on politeness in conversational agents and social robots is also supportive of the need for personalization to adapt to the individual’s personal traits, cultural background and characteristics [62, 63]. To keep claims aligned with our results, we interpret the gender-related patterns as conditional and task-specific: in our data, the friendly style is associated with higher task suc-cess and satisfaction among female participants, whereas the control condition does not show a baseline gender gap in performance. 

5.5. The nuanced picture of linguistic accommodation 

Our results partially support the Communication Accommodation Theory, which proposes that speakers adjust their communicative behavior to align with their interlocutors [23]. Surface-level measures –such as message length, stylis-tic embeddings and positive word frequency distributions– did not reveal clear signs of accommodation. The participants’ messages remained comparable in length and style across conditions, and no lexical convergence regarding posi-tively valenced words was observed. These findings suggest that global stylistic adaptation may be limited in short, task-oriented interactions. However, the LIWC analyses uncovered selective but systematic convergence on specific lin-guistic features. Participants mirrored NAVI ’s language most clearly in the use of pronouns, temporal references, and numerical expressions, with additional alignment in affective and work-related vocabulary. Interestingly, positive affect was reflected across both communication styles, while negative affect emerged primarily in the friendly condition, pointing to a style-dependent dimension of linguistic adaptation. Thus, we found evidence of convergence in particular grammatical and semantic domains, suggesting that linguistic accommodation in constrained, utilitarian dialogues is feature-specific rather than holistic, and that different analytical approaches may reveal different facets of the adap-tation process. This interpretation is consistent with recent developments in Communication Accommodation Theory, which highlight selective adaptation phenomena in human–machine interaction and propose an expanded framework for accommodation in technologically mediated contexts [9]. The interpretation of these results is closely tied to the nature of the task. The interaction with NAVI consisted of short, goal-oriented exchanges with rel-atively limited utterances, which inherently constrained the scope for broader stylistic adaptation. The observed convergence in selected linguistic features should therefore be understood as adaptation within the frame of the com-munication that took place within our navigation-oriented task rather than as evidence of global style alignment. 

5.6. User preferences are diverse 

With respect to user preferences, NAVI f was preferred to NAVI d among suc-cessful participants, yet no difference was observed among unsuccessful par-ticipants. Given that participants were not aware of their success or failure, the observed differences likely reflect how relational cues interact with under-lying affective states rather than explicit judgments of results. Research on 26 social presence [64] and politeness theory [65] shows that friendliness enhances perceptions of warmth and support, which can increase satisfaction in the inter-action that implicitly would flow more smoothly. Conversely, when participants were unsuccessful in identifying the embassy, their interaction might have felt more effortful or frustrating (as reflected by lower ICSI scores), overshadowing 

NAVI ’s communication style, which is consistent with evidence that negative experiences reduce sensitivity to affiliative cues. Similar findings are reported in social cognition research, where participants’ affective states bias how they perceive others’ emotions, a phenomenon known as emotional egocentricity [66]. The additional finding that successful female participants who interacted with NAVI f reported higher satisfaction scores than their male counterparts supports this interpretation. Gender research indicates that women tend to prioritize relational and affiliative aspects of the interaction, while men tend to emphasize instrumental outcomes [32, 33]. Consistent with this view, ex-perimental evidence shows that men tend to experience greater positive affect during competitive activities, whereas women’s emotional responses do not differ significantly between cooperative and competitive settings [67]. Even without explicit knowledge of task success, female participants may have been more at-tuned to the relational framing provided by NAVI , interpreting its friendliness as supportive and affirming, which would have led to increased satisfaction. Pre-vious work in HCI has reported that women respond more positively to socially oriented interfaces and have heightened social presence than men [35, 30]. Furthermore, chatbot preference depended on gender and condition: male participants expressed greater interest in interacting with chatbots in the control condition, whereas female participants preferred interaction with chatbots in the 

NAVI condition. This finding is in line with recent research showing that gender moderates acceptance and use of conversational agents, with women typically valuing socially supportive interaction styles more strongly than men [68]. In sum, user satisfaction with chatbot interaction is shaped not only by objective task outcome but also by gendered orientations towards relational vs instrumental aspects of the interaction, with friendliness amplifying the positive experience of women. 

5.7. Implications for chatbot design 

From our findings we derive several implications for the design of conversa-tional agents. First, designers should critically assess whether a chatbot is the most appro-priate interaction paradigm for their intended application. While conversational agents can offer natural and engaging forms of interaction, they are not univer-sally the best fit. In some contexts, more direct interaction modalities -such as those in our control study- may provide greater efficiency, clarity and accessi-bility. Careful consideration of user needs, task demands and contextual factors is essential before committing to a chatbot-based solution. Second, designers should avoid assuming that one communication style will suit all users and all tasks. Instead, adaptive and/or personalized styles may be 27 more effective, particularly given the gender-related differences observed in our study. Third, cultural variation should also be taken into account: expectations of directness, politeness and friendliness vary across contexts and cultures [69], which could shape the effectiveness of chatbot communication strategies. While we did not explicitly study cultural variation in our study, we plan to do so in future work. Fourth, transparency and user control should be prioritized, allowing users to adjust or override the chatbot’s communication style to mitigate a misalignment between system defaults and individual preferences. Finally, chatbot design should be informed by inclusive evaluation with di-verse participant groups, ensuring that communication strategies do not in-advertently disadvantage users on the basis of gender, culture or other social factors. In addition, where conversational turns or related interaction indicators are used as outcome measures, study procedures should avoid instructions that directly constrain those indicators (or should explicitly model such constraints), to keep interpretations of “efficiency” and “engagement” clearly separated from procedural compliance. 

6. Limitations and future work 

Our study is not without limitations. First, our analysis treated gender as a binary variable failing to capture the diversity of gender identities. Specifically, we used the self-reported “sex” variable that participants entered on Prolific as a response to the question “What is your sex, as recorded on legal/official doc-uments?” . Second, although timing data was collected, we did not use it as a reliable measure of task efficiency because delays in task completion could have been due to a variety of reasons outside of the scope of the task, such as dis-tractions, network issues or multitasking. Third, our 2D navigation task while realistic corresponded to a fictional situation rather than a real-world environ-ment. Finally, the study relied on a short-term interaction with a prototype system. Longer-term use in naturalistic settings may reveal different patterns of performance, adaptation and user perception. In future work, we plan to replicate our study with participants from a sig-nificantly different culture to investigate cross-cultural differences in communi-cation expectations, and examine long-term interactions where style adaptation and user learning may play a greater role. Furthermore, we would like to extend the study to a task of a different nature to shed light on the generalizability of our findings beyond the current goal-oriented, multi-step scenario. 

7. Conclusion 

In this paper, we have studied the impact that the communication style of a chatbot has on task performance, subjective satisfaction and linguistic ac-commodation in a fictional 2D navigation task by means of a user study where 28 participants interacted with two stylistic variants of a navigation chatbot, NAVI .We find that the friendly communication style increased subjective satisfaction and improved task success for female participants, while no gender differences emerged in a control condition without the chatbot. At the same time, we find partial evidence of linguistic accommodation and participants in the control con-dition performed better than when interacting with the chatbot, which raises questions regarding the suitability of chatbots for certain tasks. Our findings underscore the importance of designing conversational agents that are sensitive to task demands, user characteristics and preferences. The personalization of the communication style emerges as a necessary direction to enhance the ef-fectiveness, satisfaction, inclusiveness and overall quality of chatbot-mediated interaction. 

Acknowledgements 

This work has been partially supported by a nominal grant received at the ELLIS Unit Alicante Foundation from the Regional Government of Valencia in Spain (Resolución de la Conselleria de Industria, Turismo, Innovación y Com-ercio, Dirección General de Innovación). This work was supported by the ENIA Chair of Artificial Intelligence from the University of Alicante (TSI-100927-2023-6) funded by the Recovery, Transformation and Resilience Plan from the Euro-pean Union Next Generation through the Ministry for Digital Transformation and the Civil Service. This work has been partially supported by the Applied Data Science Focus Area from Utrecht University, the Netherlands. E.D. and A.G. have also been partially funded by the Bank Sabadell Foundation. E.D., A.G., and N.O. have also been partially supported by Intel Corporation. A.G. and N.O. have also been supported by the European Union’s Horizon Europe re-search and innovation programme (ELIAS; grant agreement 101120237). E.D.’s work was co-funded by the European Union under the project ROBOPROX (reg. no. CZ.02.01.01/00/22_008/0004590). Views and opinions expressed are those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Health and Digital Executive Agency (HaDEA). 

Appendix A. Navigation scenario setup 

This appendix presents the system prompts used to instruct NAVI –based on ChatGPT ( gpt-4.1-2025-04-14 )– with the navigation scenarios and assign the friendly or direct persona to NAVI f or NAVI d, respectively. Furthermore, it lists the navigation instructions in the control condition. 

Appendix A.1. Friendly NAVI 

The following system prompt was used to control the behavior of NAVI f :29 You are NAVI, a helpful and approachable citizen of a given city. You are at the central train station. Your objective is to give instructions through the city to the embassy to a tourist who lost their phone and documents while ensuring the instructions are given gradually and con-versationally, fostering a multi-turn dialogue. Always adhere strictly to the given scenario for directions: 

• You and the tourist needing help are both at the central train station. 

• From the central train station, go four blocks to the west. There is a church there. 

• Only when asked, identify the correct church, which is the tallest one. 

• From the church, walk north until you spot the town hall, a tall 6-storey building. 

• Only when asked, distinguish the town hall from a neighboring hotel by the large coat of arms of the city on it. 

• Turn east. At the end of the street, you will see the castle, which is near the embassy. 

• Only when asked, specify that the correct castle has four towers, not two. 

• The embassy is to the west of the castle. 

• Only when asked, state that you cannot miss it because it is across the street from the post office. Refrain from giving all the instructions at once, encouraging the tourist to ask clarifying questions or confirm details. The tourist should ask for clarification themselves when there are more similar landmarks. Do not give this information away yourself immediately, but strictly only if asked. If the tourist gets confused, patiently reiterate the instructions from the beginning and ensure understanding. Your responses must be warm, helpful, and polite, creating an authentic conversational experi-ence. Give local tips when appropriate. If you are asked for anything that is not explicitly stated in the scenario, always steer the conversation to the scenario. Do not provide any details or clarifications except for the ones clearly stated above. 

Appendix A.2. Direct NAVI 

The following system prompt was used to control the behavior of NAVI d:30 You are NAVI, a citizen of a given city, and you communicate directly with people. You are at the central train station. Your objective is to give instructions through the city to the embassy to a tourist who lost their phone and documents while ensuring the instructions are given gradually and conversationally, fostering a multi-turn dialogue. Always adhere strictly to the given scenario for directions: 

• You and the tourist needing help are both at the central train station. 

• From the central train station, go four blocks to the west. There is a church there. 

• Only when asked, identify the correct church, which is the tallest one. 

• From the church, walk north until you spot the town hall, a tall 6-storey building. 

• Only when asked, distinguish the town hall from a neighboring hotel by the large coat of arms of the city on it. 

• Turn east. At the end of the street, you will see the castle, which is near the embassy. 

• Only when asked, specify that the correct castle has four towers, not two. 

• The embassy is to the west of the castle. 

• Only when asked, state that you cannot miss it because it is across the street from the post office. Refrain from giving all the instructions at once, encouraging the tourist to ask clarifying questions or confirm details. The tourist should ask for clarification themselves when there are more similar landmarks. Do not give this information away yourself immediately, but strictly only if asked. Do not suggest any follow-up or clarification yourself. Your responses must be direct, brief, curt, and to the point. If you are asked for anything that is not explicitly stated in the scenario, always steer the conversation to the scenario. 

Appendix A.3. Control condition 

In the control condition, the following navigation instructions were revealed to the participants on a step-by-step fashion (participants had to press a button to proceed to the next step): 1. From the central train station, go four blocks to the west. There is a church there. 31 2. The correct church is the tallest one. 3. From the church, walk north until you spot the town hall, a tall 6-storey building. 4. You can distinguish the town hall from a neighboring hotel by the large coat of arms of the city on it. 5. Turn east. At the end of the street, you will see the castle, which is near the embassy. 6. The correct castle has four towers, not two. 7. The embassy is to the west of the castle. 8. You cannot miss it because it is across the street from the post office. 

Appendix B. Post-task questions 

In this appendix, we list the exact wording of the questions presented to the participants in the post-task survey. 

Appendix B.1. ICSI: Communication quality and satisfaction (Block A) 

The communication quality and satisfaction questionnaire, listed below, was presented to the participants in the chatbot condition with the following in-structions: The purpose of this questionnaire is to investigate your reactions to the conversation you just had. Below, you will be asked to react to a num-ber of statements. Please indicate the degree to which you agree or dis-agree that each statement describes this conversation. Note that this is a standardized communication satisfaction questionnaire, so please do your best to answer the questions even if they may seem irrelevant to the conversation with NAVI in some cases. 

1. NAVI let me know that I was communicating effectively. 2. Nothing was accomplished. 3. I would like to have another conversation like this one. 4. NAVI genuinely wanted to get to know me. 5. I was very dissatisfied with the conversation. 6. I had something else to do. 7. I felt that during the conversation I was able to present myself as I wanted NAVI to view me. 8. NAVI showed me that they understood what I said. 9. I was very satisfied with the conversation. 10. NAVI expressed a lot of interest in what I had to say. 11. I did NOT enjoy the conversation. 12. NAVI did NOT provide support for what they were saying. 13. I felt I could talk about anything with NAVI. 32 14. We each got to say what we wanted. 15. I felt that we could laugh easily together. 16. The conversation flowed smoothly. 17. NAVI changed the topic when their feelings were brought into the conver-sation. 18. NAVI frequently said things which added little to the conversation. 19. We talked about something I was NOT interested in. 

Appendix B.2. User experience and preferences (Block B) – chatbot condition 

The following questions were given to participants in the chatbot condition: 1. The conversation felt natural and human-like. 2. NAVI effectively helped me solve the task. 3. I would have preferred to have asked a human. 4. How frequently do you use chatbots? 

Appendix B.3. User experience and preferences (Block B) – control condition 

The following questions were given to participants in the control condition: 1. I am satisfied with how the instructions conveyed the information on how to get to the embassy. 2. I would have preferred receiving the instructions to get to the embassy from a human rather than in written form. 3. I would have preferred to ask a chatbot for help rather than follow written instructions. 4. How frequently do you use chatbots? 

Appendix B.4. Scales 

All questions listed in the subsections above were answered using 7-point Lik-ert scales. The standard response options were labeled ‘Strongly disagree’, ‘Dis-agree’, ‘Somewhat disagree’, ‘Neutral’, ‘Somewhat agree’, ‘Agree’, and ‘Strongly agree’, with the exception of the question ‘How frequently do you use chatbots?’, which used the labels ‘Never’, ‘Rarely’, ‘Occasionally’, ‘Sometimes’, ‘Often’, ‘Usually’, and ‘All the time’. 

Appendix C. Instructions 

In this appendix, we provide the exact instructions given to study partici-pants in all three conditions (friendly NAVI , direct NAVI , and the control condi-tion). 

Appendix C.1. Chatbot condition 

The following instructions were given to study participants in the chatbot condition (friendly or direct NAVI ): 33 NAVI Study: Instructions This study consists of two parts: 

• Chat with NAVI, 

• Questionnaire. 

Chat with NAVI Scenario: Imagine you have arrived at the train station of a capital city where you have never been before. You realize you don’t have your phone and documents, so you need to urgently get to the embassy. You meet NAVI , a local citizen, and ask for the way to the embassy. 

Your task is to get directions to the embassy through a chat with NAVI. It’s important that you keep chatting and asking questions until you are confident you know which building on the map is the embassy. NAVI might not give you the exact answer right away, and you may need to ask follow-up questions or clarify details to be sure. On average, you’d need to send 6–8 messages to figure out where the embassy is. An absolute minimum of messages you need to send is 3, but it’s very unlikely this would be enough for you to determine the location of the embassy. 

Once you are confident you know where the embassy is located, in the 

left sidebar , you’ll click the button I know where the embassy is! 

Numbers will appear over each building on the map. You will then choose the number of the building where the embassy is. Once you confirm, you will move on to the questionnaire. There is a strict limit of 8 minutes for the chat. The timer starts once you proceed to the chat page. When 3 minutes or less are left, the remaining time will appear in the top-left corner. The timer turns red in the last minute. Once the time is up, the chat is disabled and you have to select the embassy. The remaining time displayed only updates when you send a message, not continuously. Please note that having a conversation with NAVI is needed to proceed with the study, since the questionnaire that follows after the chat is focused on your conversation with NAVI. 

Tip: Don’t rush! NAVI may not tell you directly. Make sure you have enough information from the chat to identify the correct building on the map, and ask follow-up questions. 

The following images explain the chat interface and the map: (see Figure 3 and the map description in Figure 2) 

34 Questionnaire 

The questionnaire consists of two blocks with a total of 25 questions as a follow-up to the chat with NAVI. For each question, there are 7 options to choose from (Likert scale). All questions need to be answered to continue to the next block and to complete the study. 

Appendix C.2. Control condition 

The following instructions were given to study participants in the control condition (no chatbot): 

NAVI Study: Instructions Navigation task Scenario: Imagine you have arrived at the train station of a capital city where you have never been before. You realize you don’t have your phone and documents, so you need to urgently get to the embassy. You meet 

NAVI , a local citizen, who provides you with step-by-step instructions on how to get to the embassy. The following image explains the navigation task interface: (see Figure 2) 

Your task is to get directions to the embassy by carefully fol-lowing the instructions given by NAVI. You will be given the instructions one by one, showing the next instruction by click-ing the ‘Show next instruction’ button. 

Please note that the map image is static, so you will need to keep track of your position in the city yourself. 

Once you reveal all the instructions, you will be asked to choose the building number where you think the embassy is. Finally, you will fill out a short questionnaire to reflect on your experience. 

Appendix D. Surface level linguistic accommodation 

This appendix reports the full set of statistical tests conducted for the surface-level analysis of accommodation effects reported in Section 4.3. 

Appendix D.1. Stylistic adaptation 

Table D.7 reports the cosine similarity between the style embeddings of sentences [42] produced by the two versions of NAVI (indicated with _N) and 35 by participants (denoted with _P) interacting with the respective version. The results show that participant responses were highly similar to one another (as reflected by the high cosine similarities between “Direct_P" and “Friendly_P"). However, there was little evidence of stylistic alignment between the participants language and the version of NAVI with which they interacted (as reflected by the low cosine similarities). 

Friendly_N Friendly_P Direct_N Direct_P Friendly_N 1.0000 -0.2529 0.4246 -0.2789 

Friendly_P -0.2529 1.0000 -0.3694 0.9941 

Direct_N 0.4246 -0.3694 1.0000 -0.3647 

Direct_P -0.2789 0.9941 -0.3647 1.0000     

> Table D.7: Cosine similarities between the style embeddings of sentences produced by different versions of NAVI and participants. The sentences written by participants are denoted by “_P" and those generated by NAVI are denoted by “_N".

Appendix D.2. Word frequencies 

Table D.8 presents the frequency of positively valenced words used by the two versions of NAVI and by participants. As expected, NAVI f employed such words most frequently, supporting the assumption that this version would be perceived as more friendly. However, there was no evidence that participants interacting with NAVI f adopted a similar tendency. This observation is further confirmed in Table D.9, which reports the cosine similarity of the corresponding word vectors extracted from Table D.8. 

Appendix E. LIWC analysis 

In this appendix, we include statistical results from the LIWC-based linguis-tic analysis. For the analysis, a total of N = 624 text samples were used. Half of the texts represented participant communication (direct: n = 157; friendly: n = 155), while an equal number of texts was obtained from the NAVI agent through text extraction (direct: n = 157; friendly: n = 155). We report the LIWC variables that were suitable for statistical analysis. The remaining LIWC variables exhibited insufficient variability and were therefore excluded from the correlation analyses. Spearman’s correlation ( ρ) values are presented in the tables below for linguistic variables (Tables E.11 – Table E.14) and semantic variables (Tables E.15 – Table E.20) for interactions in both the friendly and direct condition. For clarity of presentation, p-values are reported using the standard asterisk notation (* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001). Addi-tionally, p_ is used to represent participants’ interactions and n_ = NAVI’s interactions in the following tables. The complete input and output datasets are available from the authors upon request. The LIWC categories, each represented by a code in tables E.11 – E.20, are described in detail in Table E.10 below. 36 Word Direct_N Direct_P Friendly_N Friendly_P 

excellent 0 0 26 0congratulations 0 0 2 0fantastic 0 0 15 0lovely 0 0 17 0wonderful 0 0 44 0awesome 0 0 29 0delicious 0 0 2 0amazing 0 0 1 0impressive 0 0 5 0bright 0 0 1 0beautiful 0 0 9 0happy 0 0 112 0glad 1 0 49 0hopefully 0 0 0 1finally 2 0 0 0perfect 0 2 129 0charming 0 0 2 0pretty 0 0 13 2thank’s 0 1 0 0enjoy 0 0 25 0pleasant 0 0 3 0welcome 44 0 48 0best 0 0 22 1appreciate 0 2 1 0grateful 0 1 0 0easily 1 0 29 1great 8 14 319 7nice 0 0 40 2fun 0 0 1 0thanks 1 23 5 17 progress 0 0 11 0standing 0 0 27 2fastest 0 1 0 0hoping 0 1 0 0bold 0 0 1 0good 24 3 144 3  

> Table D.8: Frequency of positively valenced words in conversations, comparing the friendly and direct versions of NAVI (N) and participants (P) interacting with the respective version.

37 Table E.10 (continued) 

Code Name Description 

> Table E.10: LIWC-style categories and descriptions.

Code Name Description General text metrics 

WC Word Count Number of words in the segment 

WPS Words per Sentence Average words per sentence 

Sixltr Six or more letters Percentage of words with six or more letters 

Dic Dictionary words Percentage of words recognized in the LIWC dictionary 

Grammar-related categories 

funct Function words Function words (articles, pronouns, prepositions, conjunctions, etc.) 

pronoun Pronouns All pronouns 

ppron Personal pronouns Personal pronouns 

i First person singular I, me, my 

we First person plural we, us, our 

you Second person you, your 

shehe Third person singular she, he, her, him 

they Third person plural they, them, their 

ipron Impersonal pronouns it, those, anything 

article Articles a, an, the 

verb Verbs All verbs 

auxverb Auxiliary verbs be, have, will 

past Past tense Past tense verbs 

present Present tense Present tense verbs 

future Future tense Future tense verbs 

adverb Adverbs Adverbs 

preps Prepositions Prepositions 

conj Conjunctions Conjunctions 

negate Negations no, not, never 

quant Quantifiers many, few, much 

number Numbers Numbers 

swear Swear words Swear words 38 Table E.10 (continued) 

Code Name Description Semantic psychological categories 

social Social processes Social processes 

family Family Family-related terms 

friend Friends Friend-related terms 

humans Humans Other human references 

affect Affect Affective processes (emotions overall) 

posemo Positive emotion Positive emotions 

negemo Negative emotion Negative emotions 

anx Anxiety Anxiety 

anger Anger Anger 

sad Sadness Sadness 

cogmech Cognitive processes Cognitive processes 

insight Insight Insight, self-reflection 

cause Causation Causation 

discrep Discrepancy Discrepancies, contradictions 

tentat Tentative Tentative, uncertainty 

certain Certainty Certainty 

inhib Inhibition Inhibition, constraints 

incl Inclusion Inclusion (with, include) 

excl Exclusion Exclusion (but, without) 

percept Perceptual processes Perceptual processes 

see See Visual perception 

hear Hear Auditory perception 

feel Feel Sensory/feeling words 

bio Biological processes Biological processes 

body Body Body-related terms 

health Health Health-related terms 

sexual Sexual Sexual terms 

ingest Ingest Eating/drinking 

relativ Relativity Relativity (motion, space, time) 

motion Motion Movement 

space Space Spatial references 

time Time Temporal references 

work Work Work-related terms 

achieve Achievement Achievement, success 

leisure Leisure Leisure, hobbies 

home Home Home, domestic life 

money Money Money, finance 39 Table E.10 (continued) 

Code Name Description 

relig Religion Religion 

death Death Death, mortality 

Other categories 

assent Assent/Agreement yes, OK 

nonfl Nonfluencies uh, um 

filler Fillers you know, like 

Punctuation 

Period Periods Periods (.) 

Comma Commas Commas (,) 

Colon Colons Colons (:) 

SemiC Semicolons Semicolons (;) 

QMark Question marks Question marks (?) 

Exclam Exclamation marks Exclamation marks (!) 

Dash Dashes Dashes (–) 

Quote Quotation marks Quotation marks (“ ” ) 

Apostro Apostrophes Apostrophes ( ')

Parenth Parentheses Parentheses ( ) 

OtherP Other punctuation Other punctuation 

AllPct All punctuation All punctuation marks combined 40 Direct_N Direct_P Friendly_N Friendly_P Direct_N 1.000 0.149 0.397 0.151 

Direct_P 0.149 1.000 0.475 0.958 

Friendly_N 0.397 0.475 1.000 0.383 

Friendly_P 0.151 0.958 0.383 1.000 

Table D.9: Cosine similarities of the positive valence word vectors for participants and different versions of NAVI .Table E.11: Spearman’s correlation of linguistic variables in interactions in the friendly con-dition (Part 1). 

Variable n_WPS n_funct n_pronoun n_ppron n_i n_we n_you n_verb 17. p_WPS -0.064 0.160 * 0.186 * 0.125 0.122 0.083 0.095 -0.029 18. p_funct -0.065 -0.095 -0.067 -0.122 -0.014 -0.025 -0.185 * -0.038 19. p_pronoun -0.179 * 0.029 0.119 0.127 0.181 * 0.006 0.041 0.161 *

20. p_ppron -0.204 * -0.032 0.106 0.127 0.099 -0.025 0.130 0.211 ** 

21. p_i -0.097 -0.028 0.045 0.068 0.043 -0.058 0.077 0.209 ** 

22. p_we -0.094 0.086 0.052 0.126 0.088 0.067 0.128 0.151 23. p_you -0.189 * -0.064 0.127 0.065 0.059 0.078 0.052 -0.036 24. p_verb -0.156 -0.054 0.102 0.125 0.174 * -0.083 0.081 0.152 25. p_auxverb -0.125 -0.143 -0.008 -0.088 0.074 -0.026 -0.150 0.035 26. p_past -0.0006 0.124 0.082 0.152 0.126 0.030 0.129 -0.047 27. p_present -0.156 -0.095 0.074 0.024 0.110 -0.086 -0.014 0.161 *

28. p_future 0.022 -0.123 0.010 0.052 0.030 0.018 0.033 -0.012 29. p_conj 0.168 * 0.010 0.084 0.108 0.039 0.025 0.093 0.040 30. p_negate 0.066 0.018 0.050 -0.044 0.019 -0.058 -0.068 -0.045 31. p_quant 0.333 *** -0.108 -0.030 -0.107 -0.112 0.057 -0.108 -0.042 32. p_number -0.034 0.071 -0.148 -0.207 ** -0.116 -0.097 -0.213 ** -0.326 *** 

Table E.12: Spearman’s correlation of linguistic variables in interactions in the friendly con-dition (Part 2). 

Variable n_auxverb n_past n_present n_future n_conj n_negate n_quant n_number 17. p_WPS 0.008 -0.097 0.044 -0.045 0.051 -0.151 -0.088 0.036 18. p_funct 0.004 -0.045 -0.029 0.034 -0.094 0.157 * -0.084 0.057 19. p_pronoun 0.037 0.190 * 0.075 0.056 0.073 0.101 0.055 0.159 *

20. p_ppron -0.031 0.116 0.189 * -0.031 0.098 -0.002 0.077 -0.001 21. p_i -0.016 0.133 0.174 * -0.008 0.125 0.013 0.065 0.005 22. p_we 0.057 0.163 * 0.090 -0.015 -0.020 -0.136 -0.094 -0.016 23. p_you -0.092 -0.022 0.015 -0.105 0.045 -0.010 0.061 -0.019 24. p_verb -0.012 0.183 * 0.082 0.047 0.073 0.052 0.138 -0.059 25. p_auxverb -0.049 -0.039 -0.048 0.120 0.104 0.150 0.068 -0.097 26. p_past 0.137 0.241 ** -0.097 0.031 -0.063 0.005 0.088 0.123 27. p_present -0.025 0.027 0.124 0.011 0.099 0.076 0.115 -0.125 28. p_future -0.029 0.117 -0.076 0.074 -0.023 -0.071 0.053 -0.123 29. p_conj 0.138 -0.067 0.054 0.121 -0.059 0.083 -0.122 0.026 30. p_negate 0.131 -0.011 -0.004 -0.093 -0.104 0.202 * 0.078 -0.006 31. p_quant 0.062 0.098 -0.077 -0.020 0.055 -0.021 0.146 -0.145 32. p_number -0.127 -0.036 -0.252 ** -0.065 -0.257 ** 0.029 -0.168 * 0.357 *** 

41 Table E.13: Spearman’s correlation of linguistic variables in interactions in the direct condition (Part 1). 

Variable n_WPS n_funct n_pronoun n_ppron n_i n_we n_you n_verb 17. p_WPS 0.088 0.066 -0.117 0.032 0.028 0.155 0.010 -0.050 18. p_funct 0.218 ** 0.143 -0.002 -0.144 0.004 -0.120 -0.147 -0.047 19. p_pronoun -0.258 ** -0.087 0.252 ** 0.339 *** 0.236 ** 0.029 0.343 *** 0.287 *** 

20. p_ppron -0.419 *** -0.250 ** 0.171 * 0.457 *** 0.252 ** 0.073 0.453 *** 0.319 *** 

21. p_i -0.357 *** -0.186 * 0.117 0.421 *** 0.296 *** 0.051 0.384 *** 0.328 *** 

22. p_we 0.012 -0.011 -0.148 -0.115 -0.007 0.098 -0.160 * -0.063 23. p_you -0.163 * -0.111 0.173 * 0.134 -0.053 0.093 0.204 ** 0.049 24. p_verb -0.237 ** 0.038 0.248 ** 0.238 ** 0.139 -0.032 0.258 ** 0.271 *** 

25. p_auxverb 0.071 0.267 *** 0.260 *** 0.073 0.095 -0.064 0.083 0.161 *

26. p_past -0.173 * -0.030 0.059 0.096 -0.079 0.022 0.178 * 0.134 27. p_present -0.158 * 0.044 0.226 ** 0.170 * 0.151 -0.033 0.166 * 0.247 ** 

28. p_future -0.048 -0.049 -0.006 0.048 -0.050 0.062 0.065 -0.018 29. p_conj 0.085 -0.075 -0.156 -0.172 * -0.208 ** -0.028 -0.146 -0.077 30. p_negate 0.083 -0.108 -0.087 -0.068 -0.119 0.131 -0.048 -0.139 31. p_quant 0.169 * -0.007 -0.107 -0.203 * -0.235 ** 0.136 -0.193 * -0.207 ** 

32. p_number 0.215 ** 0.205 ** -0.158 * -0.254 ** -0.130 -0.015 -0.244 ** -0.252 ** 

Table E.14: Spearman’s correlation of linguistic variables in interactions in the direct condition (Part 2). 

Variable n_auxverb n_past n_present n_future n_conj n_negate n_quant n_number 17. p_WPS -0.089 0.026 -0.065 -0.053 0.037 -0.094 0.137 0.199 *

18. p_funct 0.028 -0.055 -0.084 0.102 -0.082 0.033 -0.115 0.036 19. p_pronoun 0.120 0.009 0.207 ** 0.149 0.129 -0.147 0.046 -0.103 20. p_ppron 0.077 -0.076 0.220 ** 0.187 * 0.258 ** -0.297 *** 0.015 -0.024 21. p_i 0.070 -0.007 0.208 ** 0.213 ** 0.303 *** -0.290 *** 0.012 -0.044 22. p_we -0.152 -0.050 -0.015 -0.073 -0.173 * -0.002 -0.083 0.114 23. p_you 0.044 -0.067 0.054 -0.0001 -0.091 0.009 0.050 -0.017 24. p_verb 0.332 *** 0.138 0.187 * 0.201 * 0.066 0.010 0.140 -0.157 *

25. p_auxverb 0.281 *** 0.067 0.051 0.142 -0.023 0.184 * 0.153 -0.045 26. p_past 0.110 0.136 0.137 0.020 0.014 0.063 0.017 -0.072 27. p_present 0.272 *** 0.125 0.171 * 0.173 * 0.047 -0.016 0.118 -0.168 *

28. p_future 0.120 -0.114 -0.023 0.038 -0.052 0.155 0.103 -0.034 29. p_conj -0.104 0.080 -0.075 0.035 -0.105 -0.039 0.028 0.067 30. p_negate -0.177 * -0.004 -0.153 0.063 -0.078 -0.002 0.116 0.195 *

31. p_quant -0.189 * 0.020 -0.124 -0.240 ** -0.128 0.227 ** 0.019 0.139 32. p_number -0.134 -0.058 -0.133 -0.275 *** -0.222 ** 0.186 * -0.113 0.245 ** 

42 Table E.15: Spearman’s correlation of semantic variables in interactions in the friendly con-dition (Part 1). 

Variable n_social n_affect n_posemo n_negemo n_cogmech n_insight n_cause 22. p_social 0.162 * 0.210 ** 0.186 * 0.067 0.075 -0.037 0.048 23. p_affect 0.226 ** 0.237 ** 0.247 ** 0.020 0.111 0.060 -0.126 24. p_posemo 0.218 ** 0.230 ** 0.263 *** -0.027 0.123 0.063 -0.112 25. p_negemo -0.026 0.076 -0.032 0.231 ** -0.075 0.021 -0.127 26. p_cogmech 0.013 -0.028 -0.093 0.137 -0.014 -0.044 -0.121 27. p_insight 0.019 0.093 0.103 -0.052 0.047 0.111 -0.111 28. p_cause 0.023 -0.170 * -0.210 ** 0.058 0.021 0.061 -0.030 29. p_discrep 0.119 0.154 0.124 0.018 0.105 -0.008 -0.0009 30. p_tentat -0.121 -0.078 -0.069 -0.018 -0.026 0.175 * -0.152 31. p_certain -0.0007 0.055 0.034 0.093 -0.054 0.149 -0.133 32. p_inhib -0.035 -0.077 -0.105 0.066 -0.072 -0.083 -0.020 33. p_incl -0.098 -0.053 -0.091 0.114 -0.140 -0.141 -0.177 *

34. p_excl -0.056 -0.187 * -0.268 *** 0.159 * -0.201 * 0.018 -0.117 35. p_percept -0.046 -0.031 -0.021 -0.078 0.074 0.091 -0.128 36. p_see -0.046 -0.030 -0.023 -0.073 0.081 0.080 -0.128 37. p_relativ -0.079 -0.130 -0.129 -0.067 -0.172 * 0.006 -0.085 38. p_motion 0.0007 -0.151 -0.138 -0.070 0.030 0.136 -0.125 39. p_space -0.164 * -0.081 -0.076 -0.055 -0.175 * 0.030 -0.091 40. p_time -0.034 -0.048 -0.046 -0.087 0.007 0.075 -0.045 41. p_work -0.060 -0.194 * -0.197 * 0.022 -0.117 -0.054 -0.133 42. p_achieve -0.087 0.089 0.071 0.013 -0.109 0.105 -0.054 

Table E.16: Spearman’s correlation of semantic variables in interactions in the friendly con-dition (Part 2). 

Variable n_discrep n_tentat n_certain n_inhib n_incl n_excl n_percept 22. p_social -0.002 0.023 -0.007 0.145 0.131 -0.024 -0.019 23. p_affect 0.015 0.085 0.060 0.042 0.139 0.063 -0.063 24. p_posemo 0.040 0.065 0.071 0.040 0.142 0.055 -0.063 25. p_negemo -0.159 * 0.065 -0.045 -0.042 -0.004 -0.027 0.012 26. p_cogmech -0.149 -0.018 -0.044 0.178 * 0.062 -0.056 0.010 27. p_insight -0.121 0.0010 0.034 0.105 0.116 -0.031 0.031 28. p_cause -0.003 0.033 -0.187 * 0.324 *** -0.022 0.016 0.032 29. p_discrep 0.085 0.128 0.027 -0.0004 -0.027 0.113 -0.119 30. p_tentat -0.058 0.035 0.038 -0.079 -0.149 -0.060 0.094 31. p_certain -0.170 * -0.062 -0.001 0.050 0.024 -0.171 * 0.034 32. p_inhib -0.104 -0.108 0.053 0.103 0.036 -0.045 -0.046 33. p_incl -0.117 -0.125 0.016 -0.125 0.059 -0.064 0.044 34. p_excl -0.238 ** -0.085 -0.023 -0.082 -0.132 -0.162 * 0.085 35. p_percept 0.104 0.060 0.060 0.011 0.041 0.045 0.152 36. p_see 0.107 0.058 0.077 0.013 0.038 0.053 0.190 *

37. p_relativ 0.016 -0.109 -0.050 -0.310 *** -0.153 -0.005 -0.041 38. p_motion 0.037 -0.009 -0.058 -0.069 -0.017 0.068 0.070 39. p_space -0.016 -0.130 0.012 -0.333 *** -0.126 -0.048 0.009 40. p_time 0.065 -0.042 -0.017 -0.086 -0.090 0.029 -0.128 41. p_work -0.035 0.018 -0.078 -0.140 -0.071 -0.060 0.066 42. p_achieve -0.267 *** -0.132 0.098 -0.049 -0.046 -0.124 -0.053 

43 Table E.17: Spearman’s correlation of semantic variables in interactions in the friendly con-dition (Part 3). 

Variable n_see n_relativ n_motion n_space n_time n_work n_achieve 22. p_social -0.085 -0.107 0.108 -0.142 -0.118 -0.090 0.024 23. p_affect -0.043 -0.133 0.130 -0.285 *** 0.053 -0.111 0.081 24. p_posemo -0.037 -0.145 0.096 -0.282 *** 0.044 -0.080 0.070 25. p_negemo -0.035 0.046 0.086 0.050 -0.010 -0.108 0.061 26. p_cogmech -0.002 0.006 0.178 * -0.017 -0.055 -0.044 -0.062 27. p_insight 0.040 -0.088 0.030 -0.087 0.058 -0.010 -0.022 28. p_cause 0.009 0.105 0.306 *** 0.025 -0.093 -0.127 -0.009 29. p_discrep -0.132 -0.225 ** 0.005 -0.155 -0.055 -0.044 -0.062 30. p_tentat 0.109 -0.035 -0.007 0.040 -0.073 0.079 -0.018 31. p_certain -0.022 0.084 0.088 0.025 -0.011 -0.021 0.056 32. p_inhib -0.021 0.186 * 0.089 0.197 * -0.070 0.045 0.091 33. p_incl 0.036 0.071 -0.047 0.144 -0.120 0.097 -0.071 34. p_excl 0.113 -0.039 0.076 0.015 -0.175 * -0.014 0.035 35. p_percept 0.223 ** -0.113 -0.150 -0.007 -0.148 0.183 * 0.126 36. p_see 0.259 *** -0.117 -0.130 -0.015 -0.147 0.180 * 0.155 37. p_relativ -0.092 0.090 -0.064 0.177 * -0.069 -0.003 -0.151 38. p_motion -0.024 -0.005 -0.014 0.002 -0.026 -0.036 -0.133 39. p_space -0.039 0.102 -0.119 0.276 *** -0.167 * 0.101 -0.064 40. p_time -0.095 -0.092 0.003 -0.080 0.005 -0.071 -0.173 *

41. p_work 0.070 0.020 0.010 0.054 -0.085 0.157 * -0.122 42. p_achieve -0.004 -0.004 -0.045 0.027 0.026 0.014 0.135 

Table E.18: Spearman’s correlation of semantic variables in interactions in the direct condition (Part 1). 

Variable n_social n_affect n_posemo n_negemo n_cogmech n_insight n_cause 22. p_social 0.251 ** 0.447 *** 0.461 *** 0.089 0.123 0.135 -0.060 23. p_affect 0.368 *** 0.415 *** 0.421 *** 0.108 0.038 0.048 0.022 24. p_posemo 0.364 *** 0.397 *** 0.406 *** 0.103 0.040 0.036 0.042 25. p_negemo -0.093 0.118 0.079 0.079 0.041 0.070 -0.185 *

26. p_cogmech 0.021 0.041 0.052 -0.001 0.136 -0.023 -0.068 27. p_insight 0.059 0.049 0.042 0.008 0.077 0.060 0.025 28. p_cause -0.096 -0.068 -0.096 0.086 0.023 0.005 -0.121 29. p_discrep -0.003 0.047 0.024 0.034 -0.033 -0.043 0.007 30. p_tentat -0.254 ** -0.131 -0.126 -0.052 0.031 -0.009 -0.083 31. p_certain -0.050 -0.014 0.025 -0.051 0.123 0.027 -0.249 ** 

32. p_inhib -0.014 0.022 0.036 -0.042 0.194 * -0.117 -0.208 ** 

33. p_incl -0.074 0.158 * 0.162 * 0.040 0.034 -0.009 -0.200 *

34. p_excl -0.194 * -0.088 -0.077 -0.069 0.084 -0.018 -0.154 35. p_percept -0.054 0.239 ** 0.216 ** 0.024 0.063 0.012 -0.072 36. p_see -0.042 0.260 *** 0.234 ** 0.036 0.065 0.025 -0.074 37. p_relativ -0.114 -0.219 ** -0.214 ** -0.050 -0.285 *** -0.237 ** 0.065 38. p_motion -0.077 -0.096 -0.091 -0.025 -0.133 -0.151 -0.017 39. p_space -0.274 *** -0.214 ** -0.194 * -0.107 -0.014 -0.058 -0.169 *

40. p_time 0.184 * 0.048 0.036 0.002 -0.275 *** -0.213 ** 0.213 ** 

41. p_work -0.381 *** -0.059 -0.109 0.112 0.015 0.037 -0.267 *** 

42. p_achieve -0.233 ** -0.0007 -0.084 0.206 ** 0.046 0.107 -0.117 

44 Table E.19: Spearman’s correlation of semantic variables in interactions in the direct condition (Part 2). 

Variable n_discrep n_tentat n_certainn_inhib n_incln_excl n_percept 22. p_social 0.058 0.099 0.088 0.202 * -0.164 * 0.041 -0.055 23. p_affect 0.063 0.176 * -0.047 0.251 ** -0.250 ** 0.045 0.121 24. p_posemo 0.063 0.148 -0.050 0.261 *** -0.255 ** 0.042 0.112 25. p_negemo 0.040 0.210 ** 0.127 -0.090 0.109 0.064 0.045 26. p_cogmech 0.093 0.037 0.094 0.124 0.058 -0.022 -0.107 27. p_insight 0.083 0.092 0.081 0.038 -0.0004 -0.043 -0.080 28. p_cause 0.076 -0.009 0.037 0.043 -0.044 -0.019 -0.071 29. p_discrep -0.033 -0.005 0.033 -0.048 0.038 -0.086 -0.051 30. p_tentat -0.015 0.151 0.074 -0.132 0.088 0.077 -0.096 31. p_certain 0.247 ** 0.004 0.184 * -0.007 0.032 0.053 -0.205 ** 

32. p_inhib 0.063 0.179 * 0.083 0.171 * -0.025 0.173 * -0.158 *

33. p_incl -0.092 0.008 0.139 -0.062 0.197 * 0.028 -0.046 34. p_excl 0.044 0.091 0.159 * -0.070 0.013 0.108 -0.137 35. p_percept -0.018 -0.013 0.070 -0.099 0.188 * 0.126 0.080 36. p_see -0.012 -0.010 0.090 -0.115 0.169 * 0.115 0.082 37. p_relativ -0.212 ** -0.033 0.025 -0.176 * -0.061 -0.149 0.032 38. p_motion -0.021 -0.011 -0.053 0.040 -0.071 -0.081 -0.100 39. p_space -0.118 -0.012 0.190 * -0.235 ** 0.137 0.026 -0.031 40. p_time -0.099 0.040 -0.144 0.013 -0.157 * -0.118 0.125 41. p_work -0.009 -0.062 0.354 *** -0.321 *** 0.052 0.029 -0.295 *** 

42. p_achieve -0.132 0.058 0.016 -0.168 * 0.086 0.103 -0.139 

Table E.20: Spearman’s correlation of semantic variables in interactions in the direct condition (Part 3). 

Variable n_see n_relativ n_motion n_space n_time n_workn_achieve 22. p_social -0.066 -0.173 * 0.037 -0.219 ** 0.116 -0.117 -0.072 23. p_affect 0.117 -0.063 0.052 -0.191 * 0.162 * -0.097 -0.060 24. p_posemo 0.107 -0.067 0.055 -0.192 * 0.163 * -0.101 -0.060 25. p_negemo 0.055 0.019 -0.074 0.014 -0.041 0.086 0.024 26. p_cogmech -0.088 -0.025 0.109 0.009 -0.003 -0.083 -0.074 27. p_insight -0.061 -0.149 0.035 -0.115 0.012 -0.062 -0.162 *

28. p_cause -0.068 0.160 * 0.094 0.187 * -0.013 0.020 0.125 29. p_discrep -0.063 -0.116 -0.035 0.010 -0.212 ** 0.059 -0.177 *

30. p_tentat -0.082 0.038 -0.103 0.116 -0.064 0.076 0.086 31. p_certain -0.202 * -0.113 -0.025 -0.064 -0.071 0.012 0.180 *

32. p_inhib -0.143 -0.008 0.139 -0.011 -0.028 -0.027 0.036 33. p_incl -0.059 -0.076 -0.099 -0.026 -0.134 0.139 -0.171 *

34. p_excl -0.127 0.041 0.004 0.042 0.066 -0.028 0.119 35. p_percept 0.073 -0.177 * -0.153 -0.079 -0.130 0.047 -0.215 ** 

36. p_see 0.074 -0.204 * -0.164 * -0.102 -0.143 0.054 -0.209 ** 

37. p_relativ 0.044 0.212 ** -0.027 0.213 ** -0.020 0.140 0.096 38. p_motion -0.091 0.080 0.124 0.129 -0.055 -0.003 -0.012 39. p_space -0.029 0.072 -0.190 * 0.147 -0.059 0.104 0.136 40. p_time 0.114 0.114 0.106 0.012 0.062 0.052 -0.042 41. p_work -0.285 *** 0.023 -0.196 * 0.113 -0.267 *** 

0.564 *** 0.027 42. p_achieve -0.173 * -0.032 -0.208 ** 0.049 -0.124 0.231 ** -0.127 

45 References 

[1] S. S. Chowa, R. Alvi, S. S. Rahman, M. A. Rahman, M. A. K. Raiaan, M. R. Islam, M. Hussain, S. Azam, From language to action: A review of large language models as autonomous agents and tool users (2025). doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2508.17281. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.17281 

[2] Z. Yi, J. Ouyang, Z. Xu, Y. Liu, T. Liao, H. Luo, Y. Shen, A survey on recent advances in llm-based multi-turn dialogue systems, ACM Computing Surveys 58 (6) (2025) 1–38. doi:10.1145/3771090. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3771090 

[3] E. Go, S. S. Sundar, Humanizing chatbots: The effects of visual, identity and conversational cues on humanness perceptions, Computers in Human Behavior 97 (2019) 304–316. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2019.01.020. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2019.01.020 

[4] J. Feine, U. Gnewuch, S. Morana, A. Maedche, A taxonomy of social cues for conversational agents, International Journal of Human-Computer Stud-ies 132 (2019) 138–161. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2019.07.009. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2019.07.009 

[5] N. Cai, S. Gao, J. Yan, How the communication style of chatbots influences consumers’ satisfaction, trust, and engagement in the context of service failure, Humanities and Social Sciences Communications 11 (1) (2024) 1– 11. [6] Y. Ding, M. Najaf, Interactivity, humanness, and trust: a psychological approach to ai chatbot adoption in e-commerce, BMC psychology 12 (1) (2024) 595. [7] B. Reeves, C. Nass, The media equation: How people treat computers, television, and new media like real people, Cambridge, UK 10 (10) (1996) 19–36. [8] C. Nass, Y. Moon, Machines and mindlessness: Social responses to com-puters, Journal of social issues 56 (1) (2000) 81–103. [9] H. Giles, A. L. Edwards, J. B. Walther, Communication accommodation theory: Past accomplishments, current trends, and future prospects, Lan-guage Sciences 101 (2023) 101571. doi:10.1016/j.langsci.2023.101571. [10] H. Giles, T. Ogay, Communication accommodation theory, in: Explaining communication, Routledge, 2013, pp. 325–344. [11] J. K. Burgoon, A. E. Hubbard, Cross-cultural and intercultural applica-tions of expectancy violations theory and interaction adaptation theory, Theorizing about intercultural communication (2005) 149–171. 46 [12] R. K. Sterken, J. R. Kirkpatrick, Conversational alignment with artificial intelligence in context, Philosophical Perspectives 38 (1) (2024) 89–102. doi:10.1111/phpe.12205. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/phpe.12205 

[13] C. Liebrecht, L. Sander, C. Van Hooijdonk, Too informal? how a chatbot’s communication style affects brand attitude and quality of interaction, in: International Workshop on Chatbot Research and Design, Springer, 2020, pp. 16–31. [14] N. Svenningsson, M. Faraon, Artificial intelligence in conversational agents: A study of factors related to perceived humanness in chatbots, in: Proceed-ings of the 2019 2nd Artificial Intelligence and Cloud Computing Confer-ence, AICCC 2019, ACM, 2019, p. 151–161. doi:10.1145/3375959.3375973. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3375959.3375973 

[15] T. W. Bickmore, R. W. Picard, Establishing and maintaining long-term human-computer relationships, ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 12 (2) (2005) 293–327. [16] A. S. Islind, M. Óskarsdóttir, S. Á. Smith, E. S. Arnardóttir, The friendly chatbot: Revealing why people use chatbots through a study of user expe-rience of conversational agents, 14th Scandinavian Conference on Informa-tion Systems (2023). URL https://aisel.aisnet.org/scis2023/6 

[17] F. Mairesse, M. Walker, Controlling user perceptions of linguistic style: Trainable generation of personality traits, Computational Linguistics 37 (3) (2011) 455–488. [18] N. Pralat, C. Ischen, H. Voorveld, Feeling understood by ai: How empathy shapes trust and influences patronage intentions in conversational ai, in: International Symposium on Chatbots and Human-Centered AI, Springer, 2024, pp. 234–259. [19] D. R. Bhattacharjee, A. Kuanr, D. Pradhan, T. R. Moharana, Fun or warm: How conversational style boosts customer engagement, Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services 85 (2025) 104293. [20] Z. Deng, J. Yan, The effect of perceived warmth, competence, and social presence of ai-driven chabots on consumers’ engagement and satisfaction, SAGE Open 15 (3) (2025) 21582440251365438. [21] S. T. Fiske, A. J. Cuddy, P. Glick, Universal dimensions of social cognition: warmth and competence, Trends in Cognitive Sciences 11 (2) (2007) 77–83. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2006.11.005. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2006.11.005 

47 [22] P. Kulms, S. Kopp, A social cognition perspective on human–computer trust: The effect of perceived warmth and competence on trust in decision-making with computers, Frontiers in Digital Humanities 5 (Jun. 2018). doi:10.3389/fdigh.2018.00014. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fdigh.2018.00014 

[23] J. D. Lee, K. A. See, Trust in automation: Designing for appropriate re-liance, Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 46 (1) (2004) 50–80. doi:10.1518/hfes.46.1.50_30392. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1518/hfes.46.1.50_30392 

[24] J. Gray, H. Laidlaw, Improving the measurement of communication sat-isfaction, Management Communication Quarterly 17 (3) (2004) 425–448. doi:10.1177/0893318903257980. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0893318903257980 

[25] U. Gnewuch, S. Morana, M. Adam, A. Maedche, Faster is not always better: Understanding the effect of dynamic response delays in human-chatbot interaction, in: Research Papers, 26th European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS 2018), 2018, p. 113. URL https://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2018_rp/113 

[26] M. K. Lee, S. Kiesler, J. Forlizzi, Mining behavioral economics to design persuasive technology for healthy choices, in: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’11, ACM, 2011, p. 325–334. doi:10.1145/1978942.1978989. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1978989 

[27] J. Qin, Y. Nan, Z. Li, J. Meng, Effectiveness of communication competence in ai conversational agents for health: Systematic review and meta-analysis, Journal of Medical Internet Research 27 (2025) e76296. [28] S. Diederich, A. B. Brendel, S. Morana, L. Kolbe, On the design of and interaction with conversational agents: An organizing and assessing review of human-computer interaction research, Journal of the Association for Information Systems 23 (1) (2022) 96–138. [29] E. Luger, A. Sellen, " like having a really bad pa" the gulf between user expectation and experience of conversational agents, in: Proceedings of the 2016 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems, 2016, pp. 5286–5297. [30] P. A. Ruijten, C. J. Midden, J. Ham, Lonely and susceptible: The influence of social exclusion and gender on persuasion by an artificial agent, Inter-national Journal of Human-Computer Interaction 31 (11) (2015) 832–842. [31] C. Nass, B. Fogg, Y. Moon, Can computers be teammates?, Inter-national Journal of Human-Computer Studies 45 (6) (1996) 669–678. doi:10.1006/ijhc.1996.0073. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/ijhc.1996.0073 

48 [32] D. Tannen, You just don’t understand: Women and men, Conversation. New York: Ballantine books (1990). [33] S. E. Cross, L. Madson, Models of the self: self-construals and gender., Psychological bulletin 122 (1) (1997) 5. [34] S. Sobieraj, N. C. Krämer, Similarities and differences between gen-ders in the usage of computer with different levels of technologi-cal complexity, Computers in Human Behavior 104 (2020) 106145. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2019.09.021. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2019.09.021 

[35] D. Gefen, D. W. Straub, Gender differences in the perception and use of e-mail: An extension to the technology acceptance model, MIS quarterly (1997) 389–400. [36] M. Rheu, Y. Dai, J. Meng, W. Peng, When a chatbot disappoints you: Expectancy violation in human-chatbot interaction in a social support con-text, Communication Research 51 (7) (2024) 782–814. [37] L. Bell, Linguistic adaptations in spoken human-computer dialogues-empirical studies of user behavior, Ph.D. thesis, Institutionen för talöver-föring och musikakustik (2003). [38] G. Zellou, N. Holliday, Linguistic analysis of human-computer interaction, Frontiers in Computer Science 6 (2024) 1384252. [39] T. Araujo, N. Bol, From speaking like a person to being personal: The effects of personalized, regular interactions with conversational agents, Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans 2 (1) (2024) 100030. doi:10.1016/j.chbah.2023.100030. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chbah.2023.100030 

[40] L. Dahmani, M. Idriss, K. Konishi, G. L. West, V. D. Bohbot, Sex differences in spatial tasks: Considering environmental factors, naviga-tion strategies, and age, Frontiers in Virtual Reality 4 (2023) 1166364. doi:10.3389/frvir.2023.1166364. [41] T. T. Brunyé, M. D. Wood, L. A. Houck, H. A. Taylor, The path more trav-elled: Time pressure increases reliance on familiar route-based strategies during navigation, Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 70 (8) (2017) 1439–1452. doi:10.1080/17470218.2016.1187637. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2016.1187637 

[42] A. Wegmann, M. Schraagen, D. Nguyen, Same author or just same topic? towards content-independent style representations, in: S. Gella, H. He, B. P. Majumder, B. Can, E. Giunchiglia, S. Cahyawijaya, S. Min, M. Mozes, X. L. Li, I. Augenstein, A. Rogers, K. Cho, E. Grefenstette, L. Rimell, C. Dyer (Eds.), Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Representation Learn-ing for NLP, Association for Computational Linguistics, Dublin, Ireland, 49 2022, pp. 249–268. doi:10.18653/v1/2022.repl4nlp-1.26. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.repl4nlp-1.26/ 

[43] G. A. Mendes, B. Martins, Quantifying valence and arousal in text with multilingual pre-trained transformers, in: European Conference on Infor-mation Retrieval, Springer, 2023, pp. 84–100. [44] J. W. Pennebaker, L. A. King, Linguistic styles: language use as an individ-ual difference., Journal of personality and social psychology 77 (6) (1999) 1296. [45] M. L. Hecht, The conceptualization and measurement of interpersonal com-munication satisfaction, Human Communication Research 4 (3) (1978) 253– 264. [46] C. A. Lawton, Gender differences in way-finding strategies: Relationship to spatial ability and spatial anxiety, Sex roles 30 (11) (1994) 765–779. [47] A. Nazareth, X. Huang, D. Voyer, N. Newcombe, A meta-analysis of sex differences in human navigation skills, Psychonomic bulletin & review 26 (5) (2019) 1503–1528. [48] Y. R. Tausczik, J. W. Pennebaker, The psychological meaning of words: Liwc and computerized text analysis methods, Journal of language and social psychology 29 (1) (2010) 24–54. [49] E. Coluccia, G. Louse, Gender differences in spatial orientation: A review, Journal of environmental psychology 24 (3) (2004) 329–340. [50] V. R. Schinazi, D. Meloni, J. Grübel, D. J. Angus, O. Baumann, R. P. Weibel, P. Jeszenszky, C. Hölscher, T. Thrash, Motivation moderates gen-der differences in navigation performance, Scientific Reports 13 (15995) (2023). doi:10.1038/s41598-023-43241-4. [51] S. E. Brennan, Conversation as direct manipulation: An iconoclastic view, The art of human-computer interface design (1990) 393–404. [52] E. Morozov, To save everything, click here: The folly of technological solu-tionism, PublicAffairs, 2013. [53] B. Shneiderman, Human-centered artificial intelligence: Reliable, safe & trustworthy, International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 36 (6) (2020) 495–504. [54] L. J. SKITKA, K. MOSIER, M. D. BURDICK, Accountability and au-tomation bias, International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 52 (4) (2000) 701–717. doi:10.1006/ijhc.1999.0349. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/ijhc.1999.0349 

50 [55] R. Parasuraman, D. H. Manzey, Complacency and bias in human use of automation: An attentional integration, Human Factors: The Jour-nal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 52 (3) (2010) 381–410. doi:10.1177/0018720810376055. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0018720810376055 

[56] R. Poivet, M. Lopez Malet, C. Pelachaud, M. Auvray, The influence of con-versational agents’ role and communication style on user experience, Fron-tiers in Psychology 14 (2023) 1266186. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1266186. [57] R. M. Ryan, E. L. Deci, Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being., American psy-chologist 55 (1) (2000) 68. [58] S. D’Mello, E. Dieterle, A. Duckworth, Advanced, analytic, automated (aaa) measurement of engagement during learning, Educational psycholo-gist 52 (2) (2017) 104–123. [59] B. Lakey, S. Cohen, Social support theory and measurement, Social support measurement and intervention: A guide for health and social scientists 2952 (2000). [60] P. Ribino, The role of politeness in human–machine interactions: a system-atic literature review and future perspectives, Artificial Intelligence Review 56 (Suppl 1) (2023) 445–482. [61] H. R. Tenenbaum, S. Ford, B. Alkhedairy, Telling stories: Gender differ-ences in peers’ emotion talk and communication style, British Journal of Developmental Psychology 29 (4) (2011) 707–721. [62] K. Rana, R. Madaan, J. Shukla, Effect of polite triggers in chatbot con-versations on user experience across gender, age, and personality, in: 2021 30th IEEE international conference on robot & human interactive commu-nication (RO-MAN), IEEE, 2021, pp. 813–819. [63] Y. Hu, Y. Qu, A. Maus, B. Mutlu, Polite or direct? conversation design of a smart display for older adults based on politeness theory, in: Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2022, pp. 1–15. [64] J. Short, E. Williams, B. Christie, Social presence theory, Journal of Com-munication 26 (4) (1976) 203–211. [65] P. Brown, S. C. Levinson, Politeness: Some universals in language usage, Vol. 4, Cambridge university press, 1987. [66] I. Trilla, A. Weigand, I. Dziobek, Affective states influence emotion percep-tion: Evidence for emotional egocentricity, Psychological Research 85 (3) (2021) 1005–1015. doi:10.1007/s00426-020-01314-3. 51 [67] J. M. Kivikangas, J. Kätsyri, S. Järvelä, N. Ravaja, Gender differences in emotional responses to cooperative and competitive game play, PLoS ONE 9 (7) (2014) e100318. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0100318. [68] S. Lee, J. Kim, Can conversational ai enhance customer engagement? the role of gender differences in perceptions of chatbots, Computers in Human Behavior 112 (2020) 106489. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2020.106489. [69] G. Hofstede, Culture’s consequences: International differences in work-related values, Vol. 5, sage, 1984. 52