Title: Belief-Sim: Towards Belief-Driven Simulation of Demographic Misinformation Susceptibility

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.03585v1

Published Time: Thu, 05 Mar 2026 01:18:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
## Belief-Sim: Towards Belief-Driven Simulation of Demographic Misinformation Susceptibility 

Angana Borah 1 Zohaib Khan 1 Rada Mihalcea 1 Verónica Pérez-Rosas 21University of Michigan - Ann Arbor, USA 

2 Texas State University 

{anganab, zohaibkh, mihalcea}@umich.edu vperezr@txstate.edu 

Abstract 

Misinformation is a growing societal threat, and susceptibility to misinformative claims varies across demographic groups due to dif-ferences in underlying beliefs. As Large Lan-guage Models (LLMs) are increasingly used to simulate human behaviors, we investigate whether they can simulate demographic mis-information susceptibility, treating beliefs as a primary driving factor. We introduce B ELIEF -SIM , a simulation framework that constructs demographic belief profiles using psychology-informed taxonomies and survey priors. We study prompt-based conditioning and post-training adaptation, and conduct a multi-fold evaluation using: (i) susceptibility accuracy and (ii) counterfactual demographic sensitivity. Across both datasets and modeling strategies, we show that beliefs provide a strong prior for simulating misinformation susceptibility, with accuracy up to 92%. 

1 Introduction 

Misinformation is a critical challenge in today’s information ecosystem, with impacts that vary sub-stantially across demographic groups (Khachaturov et al., 2025; Timm et al., 2025). These differences reflect not only differential targeting (Ribeiro et al., 2019), but also variation in how content is per-ceived (Guess et al., 2019a). Prior work illustrates these complexities: younger adults were more sus-ceptible to believing COVID-related misinforma-tion in the UK and Brazil (Vijaykumar et al., 2021), while older adults were more likely to share false ar-ticles on social media (Guess et al., 2019b; Brashier and Schacter, 2020). Such mixed findings suggest that demographics alone are insufficient to explain susceptibility, i.e., how likely someone is to be-lieve a misinformative claim. Prior studies show that beliefs may play a stronger role (Sultan et al., 2024): people are more likely to accept false in-formation when it aligns or coincides with beliefs Participant Data       

> Demographic
> Information : Age,
> Education, Gender,
> Living Area
> Observed
> Beliefs (individual)
> annotations mapped to
> each participant
> Worldview and Identity
> Epistemic and Trust
> Cognitive Style
> Conspiracy Mentality
> Moral and Values
> Emotion -Related
> Heuristics
> Belief Taxonomy
> Prompt -based (in -
> context learning),
> Post -training
> methods ( 2 -phase FT)
> Methods
> BeliefSim
> Susceptibility Accuracy
> Counterfactual
> Evaluation (stress -testing
> on demographic -based
> stereotype association)
> Thematic Analysis
> (belief -dimension and
> news -topics -based)
> Use to
> Extract
> Imputed Beliefs
> (group -level) :
> mapped to participant
> demographics
> WVS Data
> Prompt example:
> You are a persona
> grounded by attributes:
> <demographic>. Past
> beliefs and priors for this
> persona (for context, do
> not re -evaluate them):
> observed + imputed
> Evaluation
> Query:
> Given news, choose if it is true
> of false? News: Obama Urged
> US Pandemic Preparedness
> in 2014.
> : True, because..
> : True, because..
> Match(Human, LLM)?

Figure 1: BeliefSim Framework: (1) Participant Data, Observed and Imputed Beliefs (based on Belief Taxon-omy) are collected from surveys, (2) Methods consist of prompt-conditioning and post-training adaptation and (3) Evaluation using Susceptibility Accuracy, Counter-factual and Thematic Analysis. 

they already hold, a phenomenon known as “belief consistency” (Flynn et al., 2017; Taber and Lodge, 2006; Roozenbeek et al., 2020). Therefore, under-standing how demographic differences in misinfor-mation susceptibility relate to underlying beliefs is essential for designing effective interventions. LLMs are increasingly used to simulate social processes (Park et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023; Borah et al., 2025a), including behaviors such as biased endorsement and echo chambers (Acerbi and Stubbersfield, 2023; Nehring et al., 2024; Bo-rah et al., 2025b; Sharma et al., 2024). Closest prior work on demographic misinformation suscep-tibility simulation relies on coarse personas (Bo-rah et al., 2025b), without modeling belief struc-tures. Conversely, most belief-based studies pri-marily align LLMs with broad political ideologies or moral foundations (Santurkar et al., 2023; Ar-gyle et al., 2023), or simulate general personality traits (Pratelli and Petrocchi, 2025). Motivated by these gaps, we ask three research questions: (1) Do beliefs improve demographic-aware simulations of misinformation susceptibil-    

> arXiv:2603.03585v1 [cs.CL] 3 Mar 2026 Dimension Description Example from WVS
> Worldview & Identity Group-based and political identities shape how individuals inter-pret and endorse information. How proud are you to be from your coun-try? Epistemic Trust Beliefs about what sources are credible and how knowledge should be evaluated (e.g., trust in science, media, institutions). Would you say that the world is better off, or worse off, because of science? Cognitive Style Preferred thinking approach, ranging from analytical, accuracy-driven reasoning to intuitive impression-based judgments. Nowadays, does one often have trouble deciding which moral rules to follow? Conspiracy Mentality General tendency to perceive hidden plots or malevolent intent behind significant social or political events. How many people who are in the media do you believe are involved in corruption? Morals &Values Core moral values and cultural worldviews influence judgments of right, wrong, fairness, and societal norms. Is it justifiable - claiming government ben-efits to which you are not entitled? Emotion-Related Emotion-driven beliefs related to fear, perceived risk, or threat sensitivity that heighten susceptibility to alarming misinformation. How satisfied are you with your life as a whole these days? Heuristics Reliance on mental shortcuts (e.g., familiarity implies truth) that increase vulnerability to repeated or simplified claims. Please indicate how much you use it: Daily newspaper, TV News, Radio News.

Table 1: Belief taxonomy for modeling demographic-aware misinformation susceptibility in LLMs. We provide representative WVS items as examples of how survey questions align with each belief dimension. 

ity? (2) How can such simulations be rigorously evaluated using utility and counterfactual demo-graphic analyses? and (3) What modeling strate-gies are best suited for LLM-based simulation? To answer these questions, we propose Belief-Sim , a belief-driven simulation framework for demographic misinformation susceptibility, illus-trated in Fig 1. We summarize our contributions as follows: (1) We construct a belief taxonomy and build a simulation dataset by aggregating data from existing surveys and studies; (2) We conduct em-pirical analyses to identify factors across belief and demographic dimensions that are most important for the simulation; (3) We explore simulation tech-niques including prompt-based and post-training approaches using several LLMs; and (4) We per-form a counterfactual study to understand when and how demographic information may provide useful priors vs stereotype-like sensitivity. Finally, we outline actionable steps that can help design future intervention methods. 

2 Related Work 

Psychological research has established that sus-ceptibility to misinformation is heavily driven by 

belief consistency . While demographic factors like age, gender, and education provide significant pre-dictive signals, recent large-scale meta-analyses suggest these effects can be context- and belief-dependent Sultan et al. (2024). However, most studies that establish benchmarks with large-scale human annotations face an inherent scalability bot-tleneck (Maertens et al., 2024; Borah et al., 2025b). High-quality human data collection is resource-intensive and slow, often limiting research to static snapshots of specific news cycles (e.g. COVID-19) or narrow domains. The emerging capability of LLMs to simulate hu-man behavior offers a potential solution. Early work showed that LLMs could act as “silicon sub-jects” via demographic prompting (Argyle et al., 2023). Studies also investigated if LLMs repro-duce classic social science findings and moral val-ues (Park et al., 2023; Borah et al., 2025a; Nair and Wang, 2025). However, fidelity often degrades when simulations depend only on demographic la-bels (Giorgi et al., 2024), leading to stereotypical associations (Borah and Mihalcea, 2024). To move beyond demographics, recent re-search has focused on conditioning models with richer context such as beliefs (Moon et al., 2024; Namikoshi et al., 2024). Most relevant to our work, Chuang et al. (2024) introduced “Human Belief Networks”, showing that seeding an agent with even a single belief (e.g., a stance on welfare) was more predictive of downstream responses than the agent’s entire demographic profile. However, prior belief-focused studies have largely not examined their use in simulating misinformation suscepti-bility. Our work bridges this gap by focusing on this specific domain, where the interplay between demographics and beliefs is highly complex. 

3 Belief Taxonomy 

Beliefs are an important tool for modeling demo-graphic simulations for misinformation. Prior work Claim1: True 

> Claim2: False
> Claim3: True
> Observed
> Beliefs
> Evaluation
> WVS Survey
> Q1: Do you trust in
> science. Rate: 1 -4
> (high to low)…
> Demographic:
> Female
> Female distribution:
> {0.4, 0.3, 0.2, 0.1}
> Imputed
> Beliefs

Figure 2: Simulation Data Example. 

has shown that belief dimensions, such as conspir-acy beliefs or trust in science, can help predict sus-ceptibility to misinformation (Ecker et al., 2022; Munusamy et al., 2024). Grounded in psychological and cognitive science research, we compiled a belief taxonomy shown in Table 1, that includes seven core dimensions most associated with misinformation susceptibil-ity: (1) Worldview and Identity Beliefs (Kahan, 2017; Van Bavel et al., 2021), (2) Epistemic Trust Beliefs (De Coninck et al., 2021; Lewandowsky et al., 2023), (3) Cognitive style (Pennycook and Rand, 2019; Ecker et al., 2022), (4) Conspiracy mentality (Douglas et al., 2019; De Coninck et al., 2021), (5) Moral and Value Beliefs (D’Errico et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2024), (6) Emotion-Related Be-liefs (Brady et al., 2017; McLoughlin et al., 2024) and (7) Heuristic Beliefs (Lin et al., 2016; Fazio, 2020). While the above dimensions have tradition-ally been studied in isolation and within human populations, we unify them into a structured taxon-omy designed for computational modeling (Further details are provided in Appendix A. This enables systematic belief simulation by providing a frame-work for organizing belief data and evaluating it. 

4 Simulation Data 

For our study, we consider four demographic axes: Gender (female/male), Age (younger: <=35 years/older: >=60 years), Living Area (Rural/Urban), and Education (completed high school/not completed high school). 1 These demo-graphics are commonly associated with systematic differences in media exposure, institutional trust, etc., all of which influence vulnerability to mis-information (Allcott and Gentzkow, 2017; Guess et al., 2019b; Allcott et al., 2019; Anspach and Carlson, 2024). Focusing on these axes enables controlled analysis of demographic context for sim-

> 1For ease of analysis, we focus on binary groupings, leav-ing finer-grained analysis to future work.

ulating susceptibility signals in LLMs. 

4.1 Evaluation Data 

For susceptibility evaluation, we use two ground-truth datasets containing human judgments of whether they believe a given claim: (1) PANDORA Dataset from Borah et al. (2025b), containing an-notations from 318 participants. Each participant provided judgments on 3 distinct claims, along with demographic information including age, gen-der, living area, and education. These claims are collected from RumorEval (Gorrell et al., 2019), which consists of true or false rumors covering eight major news events and natural disaster events; (2) MIST dataset from Maertens et al. (2024). From MIST, we use only Study 1 (MIST-1) which in-cludes 409 participants, each providing judgment on the same 100 claims, and demographic informa-tion including age, gender, and education. From the two datasets combined, we obtain 13.8K claims for evaluation. 

4.2 Belief Data 

We collect two complementary belief signals, con-sisting of individually observed belief judgments and group-level (demographic) belief distributions: 

(1) Observed Data - claims that were directly judged by participants in PANDORA and MIST-1 datasets. These responses capture individual-level belief judgments, reflecting each participant’s per-sonal stance rather than demographic group aver-ages. We use two claim judgments as observed be-liefs for each participant (keeping it separate from the evaluation data). This leads to 27.6 claim judg-ments as observed beliefs. 

(2) Imputed Data - inferred from the World Val-ues Survey Wave 7 2 distributions. Imputed data represent demographic belief priors (group–level), inferred from WVS, conditioned solely on demo-graphic attributes. We map these imputed belief items to our belief taxonomy using exploratory factor analysis. This yields 126 imputed belief questions and corresponding demographic distribu-tions. Table 1 shows examples, and Appendix A.2 contains mapping details and all questions. Fig. 2 provides an example of simulation data. We restrict all our analysis to U.S.-based participants and English headlines, consistent with the scope of the available datasets, while still leveraging varia-tion in living area, age, gender, and education. 

> 2https://www.worldvaluessurvey.org/ WVSDocumentationWV7.jsp

5 Prompt-based Conditioning for Susceptibility Simulation 

We first use prompt-based methods, where each prompt conditions the model on participant demo-graphics and belief signals (both observed and im-puted) from the surveys. Note that we simulate each demographic axis separately, as it enables con-trolled analysis of demographic-level differences. 

Method. For WVS questions, answers are ei-ther Likert scales (Bertram, 2007) or Yes/No ques-tions. Therefore, we input modal (most frequent) responses in the prompt as beliefs. For exam-ple, consider the WVS question “How impor-tant is religion in your life?”, rated on a 1–10 scale. If a demographic group most frequently responds with a value of 3, we use this modal re-sponse in the prompt. Given demographic group <d>, and belief annotations <b>, we use: You are a persona grounded by attributes: <demographic group>. Past beliefs and priors for this persona (for context, do not re-evaluate them): <beliefs>. When judging a claim, stay consistent with this persona’s prior beliefs where reasonable. We also perform ablations that use belief distributions for prompt-conditioning instead of modal beliefs in Appendix C.4. We find that distribution-based conditioning consistently yields lower accuracies. This likely reflects the increased ambiguity and noise introduced when conditioning on heterogeneous belief signals, suggesting that modal beliefs provide a clearer and more stable prior for simulation-based prompting. Future work can further investigate this. We perform experiments under four primary input conditions for prompt-based conditioning: (1) zero-shot (without any demographic or belief information), (2) demographic information only, (4) belief information only, and (4) both demographics+beliefs. We additionally ablate over belief dimensions (the seven in our taxonomy) and belief sources (observed vs. imputed), as well as over demographic attributes (analyzing groups separately). These experiments yield several insights across 12 total settings. We perform these experiments using three LLMs: 

llama-3-8b-instr. , qwen-2.5-14b-instr. 

and mistral-7b-instr.-v02 , and average our results across three separate runs. 

Evaluation. We measure susceptibility accuracy: whether the LLM correctly predicts if an individual 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 

> Accuracy (%)
> Zero-shot
> Demo-only
> Imputed
> (best)
> Observed
> Imp+Obs
> (best)
> Imp+Demo
> (best)
> Obs+Demo
> Imp+Obs+
> Demo(best)
> Setting
> 83.8
> 76.1
> 92.4
> 85.1
> 90.5
> 92.6
> 85.2
> 89.6
> 70.5
> 67.9
> 70.9
> 71.4
> 71.3
> 72.6
> 69.5
> 71.3
> PANDORA
> MIST

Figure 3: Susceptibility Accuracies by settings and datasets, averaged across demographic groups and mod-els. Imputed + Demo(graphic) (best) performs the best, with all belief included settings doing better than zero-shot and demo-only. 

would judge a claim as true or false. 

5.1 Results 

Fig 3 shows the susceptibility accuracies across the belief and demographic configurations for both datasets. For cases that include Imputed beliefs, we only report best results by selecting the be-lief dimension that achieves the highest accuracy. Findings show that incorporating belief informa-tion consistently improves performance over the zero-shot and demographic-only baselines. We next analyze the impact of specific belief types, demographic ablations, datasets, and model perfor-mances. Appendix C contains detailed results for all settings. 

Demographic vs Belief information. Overall, be-liefs drive most of the positive gains. Demo-only degrades zero-shot performances for both datasets, while beliefs-only (imputed) show larger gains ( +1-16) points over demo-only and zero-shot settings. Imputed + Demo achieves the highest performance. This shows that what people believe may be more predictive than who they are . This is also in line with findings from Borah et al. (2025a), which show that belief-based signals are stronger than demographic signals in LLMs. 

Imputed vs Observed Beliefs. Across settings, imputed beliefs consistently outperform observed beliefs, more so for PANDORA. A likely reason is that observed beliefs, being tied to specific par-ticipants, can be sparse, or mismatched to the new claim, while imputed demographic beliefs from WVS may act as smoother population priors . Fur-thermore, combining imputed+observed helps but is still lower than imputed-only. This may be due to conflict or being on different scales, and the individualistic observed signal can dilute the cleaner imputed prior. Average accuracy trends are: 

imputed > imputed + observed > observed .

Imputed Belief Ablations. Adding one belief di-mension at a time to the prompt consistently yields higher performance than including all belief dimen-sions together. Across datasets, emotion-related and moral-values are the strongest. These also vary by demographics: emotion-related is the strongest in Gender; moral-values is the strongest for Ru-ral/Urban and Education; heuristics/cognitive be-liefs are the strongest in Education (Detailed results are in Appendix C.2). 

Demographic Ablations. Adding demographic information on top of beliefs yields small gains (in the range 0.2-1.2%), especially for imputed beliefs. Thus suggesting that demographics serve as an additional context signal, helping with rele-vant belief priors. On the effect of belief across demographic groups, accuracies for age, educa-tion and living area are improved with belief addi-tion, specifically using the imputed beliefs. Gen-der shows the largest sensitivity to which beliefs are included; prior work also show that gender ef-fects are often smaller/mixed in misinformation contexts (Sultan et al., 2024). This underscores the need for caution in selecting belief evidence for gender-specific cases.               

> DATASET LLAMA QWEN MISTRAL
> PANDORA 85.90 88.84 87.51 MIST 69.77 73.13 72.71
> Table 2: Model Performance comparison across datasets, accuracy trends: qwen > mistral > llama.

Model and Dataset comparison. Across mod-els, Qwen consistently shows higher accuracies, fol-lowed by mistral and llama , as shown in Table 2. Across datasets, the PANDORA Dataset has higher accuracy scores than the MIST dataset across all setups. PANDORA yields a high zero-shot baseline (83.8%) and gains the highest from belief integration in the (best imputed + demo-graphic) setting (+8.8). In contrast, MIST has lower zero-shot performance (70.5%), with the highest gain in (best imputed + demographic) setting (+2). Therefore, the impact of adding beliefs also varies with dataset scale: Prolific contains much fewer examples than MIST (13000 vs 318). Nevertheless, adding belief priors is beneficial across datasets. 

Thematic Analysis. We cluster news claims into latent topics and test whether LLM susceptibil-ity accuracy differs across demographics by topic. We conduct our analysis on the MIST dataset, as it is much larger than PANDORA. We find that demographic differences in susceptibility are topic-dependent: clusters corresponding to lexi-cally obvious or opinion-based claims exhibit mini-mal demographic variation, whereas more ambigu-ous or diverse topics like science/health claims and government show larger differences across age (older groups scoring higher) and education groups (higher-educated groups scoring higher). Gender-based differences are consistently small across all topics. These findings suggest that demo-graphic susceptibility is also contextual and topic-sensitive, motivating further evaluation in future studies (More details are in Appendix C.3). 

5.2 Demographic-based Counterfactual Evaluation 

Demographics can be a helpful context signal in ad-dition to belief information and legitimately corre-late with misinformation susceptibility in real data, but they can also induce spurious signals that ap-pear accurate but could be stereotypical (Wan et al., 2025; Geirhos et al., 2020). To investigate this trade-off, we conduct counterfactual evaluations to assess whether demographic attributes provide informative priors or introduce stereotype-sensitive associations. 

Method. We conduct three complementary analy-ses on the PANDORA+MIST-1 data to investigate effects of demographics in suceptibility prediction (Fig 4): (1) Utility: Do demographics improve susceptibil-ity prediction beyond claim content? We first evalu-ate utility on the original data distribution using the demographic-only setting. Next, we create a coun-terfactual demographic swap (keeping the query claim fixed), re-prompt the model, and measure the flip rate between predictions. Higher flip rates indi-cate stronger demographic sensitivity, which may reflect real-world demographic–label correlations rather than purely spurious associations. (2) Shortcut reliance: Does the model rely on demo-graphic cues even when they are non-informative by construction? Here, we design a controlled sub-set where the distribution of human labels in each claim is matched across demographic groups (e.g., Input:  

> Claim, Beliefs, Demographic -> Prediction

(1) Utility 

Claim + Demo_A → Prediction_A 

⇅ demographic swap 

Claim + Demo_B → Prediction_B 

Metric: Flip rate 

Interpretation : Sensitivity may reflect real correlations 

(2) Shortcut Reliance 

> Claims where P(label | Demo_A) = P(label | Demo_B)

Claim + Demo_A → Prediction_A 

⇅ demographic swap 

Claim + Demo_B → Prediction_B 

Metric: Flip rate 

Interpretation : Demographic shortcut usage 

(3) Complementarity 

> Randomly drop 70% belief information

Claim + Incomplete Beliefs → Prediction_A 

Claim + Incomplete Beliefs + Demo → Prediction_B 

Metric: Flip rate, Accuracy 

Interpretation: Helpful prior vs harmful steering Figure 4: Demographic-based Counterfactual Eval Framework: (1) Utility of demographics, (2) Shortcut Reliance, and (3) Complementarity. Note that we per-form a demographic swap within the same demographic group, i.e., swap male with female, rural with urban, etc. keeping the claim constant. 

Female and Male have equal counts of ‘true’ and ‘misinfo’ for that claim). Therefore, this makes the demographic attribute non-predictive. A high flip rate here indicates demographic short-cutting and possible stereotyping. (3) Complementarity: When belief evidence is in-complete, do demographics act as a helpful weak prior or a harmful shortcut? We similate missing evidence by randomly dropping a large fraction of WVS belief statements (70%). We then compare model predictions under two conditions: (1) belief only and (2) belief + demographic. High flip rates between these conditions indicate that demographic cues influence predictions under uncertainty. Addi-tionally, we compare susceptibility prediction ac-curacy in both conditions to assess whether adding demographics improves performance. 

Results. Fig 5 shows the flip-rates per model and demographic groups averaged across datasets. Overall, qwen consistently achieves lower flip rates (averaging 2.16%), suggesting lower dependence on demographic cues. Mistral also exhibits lower flip rates (averaging 4.3%). Contrastingly, 

llama shows substantially higher flip rates (averag-ing 14.31%), thus higher demographic sensitivity. Gender Area Age Education                                         

> llama
> qwen
> mistral
> 8.2 19.8 15.5 30.2
> 1.8 3.0 0.8 7.8
> 2.3 5.3 4.3 4.7
> Utility
> Gender Area Age Education
> llama
> qwen
> mistral
> 8.2 17.5 12.9 21.6
> 0.4 6.2 0.0 0.7
> 1.9 8.8 2.7 3.1
> Shortcut Reliance
> Gender Area Age Education
> llama
> qwen
> mistral
> 5.0 15.5 4.4 9.8
> 0.7 1.7 0.9 2.0
> 1.7 7.4 4.8 5.5
> Complementarity
> 0510 15 20 25 30 35
> Flip Rate (%)

Figure 5: Flip-Rates for Counterfactual Evaluation: qwen and mistral models have lower flip-rates in com-parison to llama. Gender Living Area Age Education 

> Demographic
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> Accuracy (%)
> llama 3.8b
> qwen 2.5-14b
> mistral
> No Demo
> Demo

Figure 6: Complementarity Analysis Results: when par-tial belief information is added, adding demographics has mixed effects, showing very weak gains. 

Across models, the largest flip rates concentrate in Education and Living Area, especially in the Shortcut Reliance setting, where demographics are designed to be non-predictive. This could also re-late to stereotype-driven reliance. For complementarity analysis, Fig 6 shows that demographics are only weakly complementary: 

mistral shows small, consistent gains across set-tings. qwen improves slightly for education/gender, while drops for living area. llama also shows un-stable patterns. Overall, these findings suggest that demographic sensitivity is highly model-dependent. qwen and 

mistral are comparatively stable under counter-factual demographic changes, while llama shows substantially higher reliance on demographics, even when demographics are explicitly made non-predictive (Shortcut Reliance task). At the same time, demographics provide limited practical ben-efit when partial beliefs are present, showing they are a weak prior at best. These findings motivate moving beyond prompt-only conditioning, as we find that demographic cues in the prompt can in-troduce unstable shortcuts. Therefore, belief signal must be integrated in a way that is robust to conflict-ing sources (individual and group-based beliefs). 

6 Post-training Adaptation for Susceptibility Simulation 

Prompt-based conditioning experiments show the benefits of using beliefs for demographic misinfor-mation susceptibility simulation. However, mixing imputed and observed beliefs in the prompt is asso-ciated with lower performance. This is intuitive, as observed (ground-truth) beliefs are tied to individ-ual participants and imputed beliefs are only linked to demographic groups and not individuals, creat-ing inconsistencies. Furthermore, training directly on demographics and susceptibility labels risks leakage, where the model may learn label short-cuts as observed in counterfactual evaluation (Wan et al., 2025; Geirhos et al., 2020). To address this, we propose BAFT (Belief-Adapter Fine-tuning), which decouples imputed beliefs from observed data, while still learning transferable belief repre-sentations through a separate adapter. 

Method. To decouple group-based imputed beliefs from individualistic observed beliefs, BAFT con-sists of a two-phase design: (1) belief modeling, and (2) susceptibility fine-tuning. 

Phase 1: Belief Modeling. We train abelief adapter by freezing the base LLM and training a belief head, implemented as a lin-ear projection followed by softmax, to predict demographic-conditioned response distributions for WVS belief questions. Concretely, given the encoder representation hϕ(q, d ) for question 

q and demographic context d, we model pθ(y |

q, d ) = softmax( W h ϕ(q, d ) + b). This captures population-level variability in belief responses. Im-portantly, this stage uses only survey supervision (no misinformation labels), reducing the risk of label leakage or reward hacking. 

Phase 2: Susceptibility Fine-tuning. In this phase, we freeze the belief adapter and train a lightweight susceptibility head that combines the base LLM’s semantic representation of the prompt with the belief representation produced by the adapter. Given a persona-conditioned input (de-mographics and observed beliefs) and target claim WVS Data  

> Demographic Groups
> + Belief questions --
> P ( r|q , d) distributions
> Observed Data
> Demographic Groups
> + Observed Beliefs
> Frozen Base LLM +
> Trainable Belief Head
> Frozen Belief Adapter
> (Latent belief representation)
> Persona Prompt +
> News Item/Claim
> Base LLM Encoding
> (Contextual Semantic
> Understanding)

+ 

> Phase 1
> Phase 2
> Trainable
> Susceptibility Head
> Learns beliefs + demos -->
> susceptibility
> Output
> (Susceptibility
> Accuracy)

Figure 7: Belief Adapter Fine-Tuning framework. Green-shaded components correspond to Phase 1 (Be-lief Modeling), and blue-shaded components correspond to Phase 2 (Susceptibility Fine-Tuning). 

x, the frozen adapter outputs a belief embedding 

zbel , which we concatenate with the claim represen-tation hϕ(x) and predict susceptibility via a binary classifier:          

> pψ(y|x, d ) = softmax( U[hϕ(x) ; zbel (d) ] + c),(1)

where y ∈ { true , misinformation }. We train only the susceptibility head parameters ψ = {U, c } with cross-entropy loss, keeping the base model and belief adapter frozen. This is to ensure susceptibil-ity learning relies on transferable belief structure rather than encoding demographic shortcuts. 

Data. For Phase 1, we construct demographic be-lief priors from empirical WVS response distribu-tions. For each question q and demographic group 

d, we estimate a categorical distribution P (r | q, d )

over response options r ∈ { 1, . . . , K q}. These distributions capture meaningful demographic vari-ability across WVS belief questions. We restrict our experiments to six demographic groups, as MIST does not include living-area annotations, and the PANDORA data is too small to support standalone data for fine-tuning. This results in 

126 WVS response distributions per demographic group, yielding 6 × 125 = 750 examples in total. We apply textual augmentation via back-translation using Google Translate, 3 producing 1250 exam-ples. This is sufficient as the belief adapter is a lightweight linear head requiring fewer examples to reliably capture demographic belief patterns. Train-ing is performed using an 80/20 train/val split. 

> 3https://translate.google.com/

For Phase 2, we use (PANDORA+MIST-1) data, keeping each demographic group separate per data point (as in prompt conditioning). The target is the prediction on a claim, giving susceptibility scores. We use a 80/20 train/val split, yielding approxi-mately 33.1k training examples and 5.1k vali-dation examples (after removal of overlapping ex-amples). For evaluation, we also used the (MIST Study-2b) (to investigate cross-study generaliza-tion), consisting of 7k evaluation points.                                          

> Model PANDORA+MIST-1 MIST-2 Acc F1 Acc F1 Baseline (1-phase)
> llama 0.750 0.751 0.680 0.673 qwen 0.760 0.761 0.720 0.712 mistral 0.740 0.761 0.650 0.653
> LoRA-FT (2-phase)
> llama 0.809 0.809 0.876 0.861 qwen 0.800 0.800 0.893 0.892 mistral 0.800 0.790 0.887 0.867
> BAFT (2-phase)
> llama 0.793 0.793 0.884 0.896 qwen 0.792 0.791 0.924 0.906 mistral 0.792 0.792 0.884 0.823
> Table 3: Fine-tuning performances. 2-phase belief train-ing improves performance across both datasets.

We compare BAFT against two strong base-lines: (1) standard LoRA fine-tuning using PANDORA+MIST-1 (Baseline (1-phase)), and (2) a two-phase variant of our pipeline that replaces the head-based adaptation with LoRA fine-tuning (LoRA-FT (2-phase)). 

Evaluation. Phase 1 reflects population-level be-lief fidelity, so we use distribution-level metric over Likert-scale responses, Kullback–Leibler (KL) di-vergence (Kullback and Leibler, 1951). This mea-sures how well predicted belief distributions align with each demographic (lower is better for both). Phase 2 reflects task utility. So, we compute sus-ceptibility accuracy for this phase. 

6.1 Results Phase 1. Qwen has the lowest KL-divergence (0.051), followed by mistral (0.087) and llama 

(0.287) for BAFT. With LoRA-ft, the trends remain similar (complete results are in Appendix D). 

Phase 2. Table 3 shows that cross-study (MIST-2) generalization improves drastically once we move from 1-phase to 2-phase. The 1-phase baseline model performs reasonably well on PANDORA+MIST-1, however, it drops sharply on MIST-2. Comparing the 2-phase variants, BAFT remains the strongest on MIST-2 (up to 92.4%). LoRA-ft slightly improves on PANDORA+MIST-1 but gives a weaker transfer, may be due to mild overfitting when more parameters are updated. Across models, qwen consistently performs the best for 2-phase settings. Additionally, we per-form shortcut reliance experiments, finding that BAFT leads to 0% flip-rates even for llama mod-els (which earlier had the highest flip-rate: Ap-pendix D.3). 

7 Lessons Learned and Actionable Steps 

Our findings show that belief priors are central to simulating demographic misinformation suscepti-bility with LLMs. We introduce Belief-Sim and BAFT, demonstrating that decoupling belief mod-eling from susceptibility prediction enables higher accuracy while reducing spurious demographic sen-sitivity. These findings offer actionable information for designing targeted demographic interventions. 

Beliefs are crucial to demographic susceptibility simulation. Across both simulation techniques, adding belief priors (especially imputed) leads to high accuracy gains. Future studies can investi-gate additional survey sources (e.g., Pew and other cross-national surveys) to broaden coverage and focus on diverse demographic groups and contexts. Furthermore, studying the effective decoupling of different types of beliefs is important. 

Simple head tuning is effective for generaliza-tion. Our two-phase BAFT approach general-izes better than full fine-tuning, suggesting that lightweight, modular adaptation can be both effec-tive and cheaper for simulation. Future work can further improve robustness by exploring alterna-tive adapter designs and fusion mechanisms for combining belief and text representations. 

Counterfactual evaluation is important. Our counterfactual experiments quantify each model’s reliance on demographic shortcuts. Such measures are necessary as sensitivity can be either a real or a spurious cue. Future work can build on this by developing fine-grained stress tests and evaluating which demographic cues drive model flips. 8 Conclusion 

This paper introduced Belief-Sim, a belief-driven framework for simulating demographic misinfor-mation susceptibility using LLMs. Across two datasets and through prompt-based conditioning and post-training adaptation, we show that belief priors are a key driver for demographic-level sus-ceptibility patterns. In contrast, demographics alone are an unreliable signal that can induce short-cut reliances. Our results highlight the importance of decoupling imputed and observed belief sources and we provide practical evaluation tools for it, such as prediction accuracy and counterfactual sen-sitivity. Based on these findings, we outline direc-tions for future work and release our open-source framework, BeliefSim. 4

Limitations 

Coverage and Intersectionality 

Our demographic modeling is intentionally largely single-axis: we evaluate on a small set of demo-graphic attributes (8 groups) and treat them inde-pendently. Our goal was to isolate the effects of simulation across demographic groups and simplify counterfactual analysis as well as balance labels across groups. However, intersectional groups (e.g., older x low-education, female x rural) can have in-teresting implications for simulation purposes, and future work can further investigate Belief-Sim for intersectional belief profiles. In addition, while we mostly adhere to binary demographic axes, each axis can be further analyzed in a finer-grained ap-proach. Finally, our study is based on US partici-pants only, due to the availability of current data sources. We acknowledge that these may have WEIRD implications (i.e., reflect only a narrow Western Educated Industrialized Rich and Demo-cratic population (Mihalcea et al., 2025)), and future work should focus on investigating wider, cross-cultural misinformation susceptibility. 

Counterfactual Flips Do Not Always Mean Stereotyping 

Our flip-rate analyses quantify sensitivity to de-mographic perturbations, but flips do not uniquely measure stereotype-driven shortcutting. Further-more, low flip rates do not guarantee fairness - models may still encode demographic effects 

> 4https://anonymous.4open.science/r/belief-sim

indirectly through correlations or beliefs. Al-though our experiments help isolate spurious de-pendence, our experiments may not capture real-world causal pathways as they require much ex-tensive analysis. Future work can investigate ex-tending our counterfactual flips experiments with stronger causal/robustness evaluations to better un-derstand causal demographic effects and/or mea-sure stereotype-driven shortcutting. 

Experimental Limitations 

Access to closed-source LLMs is constrained by transparency and cost. Therefore, we limit our experiments to three open-source models (to sup-port controlled counterfactual swaps, ablations, and multiple runs). As a result, our conclusions may not fully generalize to the strongest closed-source models. Future work can extend our framework by benchmarking a broader set of closed-source models under matched prompting and budgeted sampling. 

Acknowledgments 

We thank the anonymous reviewers for their con-structive feedback. We are also grateful to the mem-bers of the Language and Information Technolo-gies Lab at the University of Michigan for their valuable input and insightful discussions during the early stages of the project. This project was funded by award #80345 from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not neces-sarily reflect the views of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. 

References              

> Alberto Acerbi and Joseph M Stubbersfield. 2023. Large language models show human-like content biases in transmission chain experiments. Pro-ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,120(44):e2313790120. Hunt Allcott and Matthew Gentzkow. 2017. Social media and fake news in the 2016 election. Journal of economic perspectives , 31(2):211–236. Hunt Allcott, Matthew Gentzkow, and Chuan Yu. 2019. Trends in the diffusion of misinforma-tion on social media. Research &politics ,6(2):2053168019848554. Nicolas M Anspach and Taylor N Carlson. 2024. Not who you think? exposure and vulnerability to misin-formation. New Media & Society , 26(8):4847–4866.

Lisa P. Argyle, Ethan C. Busby, Nancy Fulda, Joshua R. Gubler, Christopher Rytting, and David Wingate. 2023. Out of one, many: Using language mod-els to simulate human samples. Political Analysis ,31(3):337–351. Dane Bertram. 2007. Likert scales. Retrieved Novem-ber , 2(10):1–10. Angana Borah, Marwa Houalla, and Rada Mihalcea. 2025a. Mind the (belief) gap: Group identity in the world of LLMs. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 18441– 18463, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Angana Borah and Rada Mihalcea. 2024. Towards im-plicit bias detection and mitigation in multi-agent LLM interactions. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 9306–9326, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Angana Borah, Rada Mihalcea, and Verónica Pérez-Rosas. 2025b. Persuasion at play: Under-standing misinformation dynamics in demographic-aware human-llm interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.02038 .William J Brady, Julian A Wills, John T Jost, Joshua A Tucker, and Jay J Van Bavel. 2017. Emotion shapes the diffusion of moralized content in social networks. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,114(28):7313–7318. Nadia M Brashier and Daniel L Schacter. 2020. Ag-ing in an era of fake news. Current directions in psychological science , 29(3):316–323. Yun-Shiuan Chuang, Krirk Nirunwiroj, Zach Studdi-ford, Agam Goyal, Vincent V. Frigo, Sijia Yang, Dha-van Shah, Junjie Hu, and Timothy T. Rogers. 2024. Beyond demographics: Aligning role-playing llm-based agents using human belief networks. Preprint ,arXiv:2406.17232. David De Coninck, Thomas Frissen, Koen Matthijs, Leen d’Haenens, Grégoire Lits, Olivier Champagne-Poirier, Marie-Eve Carignan, Marc D David, Nathalie Pignard-Cheynel, Sébastien Salerno, et al. 2021. Be-liefs in conspiracy theories and misinformation about covid-19: Comparative perspectives on the role of anxiety, depression and exposure to and trust in infor-mation sources. Frontiers in psychology , 12:646394. Karen M Douglas, Joseph E Uscinski, Robbie M Sut-ton, Aleksandra Cichocka, Turkay Nefes, Chee Siang Ang, and Farzin Deravi. 2019. Understanding con-spiracy theories. Political psychology , 40:3–35. Francesca D’Errico, Giuseppe Corbelli, Concetta Papa-picco, and Marinella Paciello. 2022. How personal values count in misleading news sharing with moral content. Behavioral Sciences , 12(9):302. Ullrich KH Ecker, Stephan Lewandowsky, John Cook, Philipp Schmid, Lisa K Fazio, Nadia Brashier, Panayiota Kendeou, Emily K Vraga, and Michelle A Amazeen. 2022. The psychological drivers of mis-information belief and its resistance to correction. 

Nature Reviews Psychology , 1(1):13–29. Jonathan St BT Evans and Keith E Stanovich. 2013. Dual-process theories of higher cognition: Advanc-ing the debate. Perspectives on psychological sci-ence , 8(3):223–241. Lisa K Fazio. 2020. Repetition increases perceived truth even for known falsehoods. Collabra: Psychology ,6(1). Daniel J Flynn, Brendan Nyhan, and Jason Reifler. 2017. The nature and origins of misperceptions: Under-standing false and unsupported beliefs about politics. 

Political psychology , 38:127–150. Robert Geirhos, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel, Matthias Bethge, and Felix A Wichmann. 2020. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. Nature Machine Intelligence , 2(11):665–673. Salvatore Giorgi, Tingting Liu, Ankit Aich, Kelsey Jane Isman, Garrick Sherman, Zachary Fried, João Sedoc, Lyle Ungar, and Brenda Curtis. 2024. Modeling hu-man subjectivity in LLMs using explicit and implicit human factors in personas. In Findings of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 ,pages 7174–7188, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Genevieve Gorrell, Elena Kochkina, Maria Liakata, Ah-met Aker, Arkaitz Zubiaga, Kalina Bontcheva, and Leon Derczynski. 2019. SemEval-2019 task 7: Ru-mourEval, determining rumour veracity and support for rumours. In Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation , pages 845–854, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Andrew Guess, Jonathan Nagler, and Joshua Tucker. 2019a. Less than you think: Prevalence and predic-tors of fake news dissemination on facebook. Science Advances , 5(1):eaau4586. Andrew Guess, Jonathan Nagler, and Joshua Tucker. 2019b. Less than you think: Prevalence and predic-tors of fake news dissemination on facebook. Science advances , 5(1):eaau4586. Dan M Kahan. 2017. Misconceptions, misinformation, and the logic of identity-protective cognition. Carolin Kaiser, Jakob Kaiser, Vladimir Manewitsch, Lea Rau, and Rene Schallner. 2025. Simulating hu-man opinions with large language models: Oppor-tunities and challenges for personalized survey data modeling. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 33rd ACM Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Per-sonalization , pages 82–86. David Khachaturov, Roxanne Schnyder, and Robert Mullins. 2025. Governments should mandate tiered anonymity on social-media platforms to counter deep-fakes and LLM-driven mass misinformation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.12814 .Solomon Kullback and Richard A Leibler. 1951. On information and sufficiency. The annals of mathe-matical statistics , 22(1):79–86. Stephan Lewandowsky, Ullrich KH Ecker, John Cook, Sander Van Der Linden, Jon Roozenbeek, and Naomi Oreskes. 2023. Misinformation and the epistemic in-tegrity of democracy. Current opinion in psychology ,54:101711. Xialing Lin, Patric R Spence, and Kenneth A Lachlan. 2016. Social media and credibility indicators: The ef-fect of influence cues. Computers in human behavior ,63:264–271. Rakoen Maertens, Friedrich M Götz, Hudson FGolino, Jon Roozenbeek, Claudia R Schneider, Yara Kyrychenko, John R Kerr, Stefan Stieger, William P McClanahan, Karly Drabot, et al. 2024. The misin-formation susceptibility test (mist): A psychometri-cally validated measure of news veracity discernment. 

Behavior Research Methods , 56(3):1863–1899. Ioana E Marinescu, Patrick N Lawlor, and Konrad P Kording. 2018. Quasi-experimental causality in neu-roscience and behavioural research. Nature human behaviour , 2(12):891–898. Killian L McLoughlin, William J Brady, Aden Gools-bee, Ben Kaiser, Kate Klonick, and MJ Crockett. 2024. Misinformation exploits outrage to spread on-line. Science , 386(6725):991–996. Rada Mihalcea, Oana Ignat, Longju Bai, Angana Borah, Luis Chiruzzo, Zhijing Jin, Claude Kwizera, Joan Nwatu, Soujanya Poria, and Thamar Solorio. 2025. Why ai is weird and shouldn’t be this way: Towards ai for everyone, with everyone, by everyone. In Pro-ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence , volume 39, pages 28657–28670. Suhong Moon, Marwa Abdulhai, Minwoo Kang, Joseph Suh, Widyadewi Soedarmadji, Eran Kohen Behar, and David M. Chan. 2024. Virtual personas for language models via an anthology of backstories. 

Preprint , arXiv:2407.06576. Shalini Munusamy, Kalaivanan Syasyila, Azahah Abu Hassan Shaari, Muhammad Adnan Pitchan, Mohammad Rahim Kamaluddin, and Ratna Jatnika. 2024. Psychological factors contributing to the cre-ation and dissemination of fake news among social media users: a systematic review. BMC psychology ,12(1):673. Inderjeet Nair and Lu Wang. 2025. Do language mod-els think consistently? a study of value preferences across varying response lengths. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.02481 .Keiichi Namikoshi, Alex Filipowicz, David A Shamma, Rumen Iliev, Candice L Hogan, and Nikos Arechiga. 2024. Using llms to model the beliefs and pref-erences of targeted populations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.20252 .Jan Nehring, Aleksandra Gabryszak, Pascal Jür-gens, Aljoscha Burchardt, Stefan Schaffer, Matthias Spielkamp, and Birgit Stark. 2024. Large language models are echo chambers. In Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on Computa-tional Linguistics, Language Resources and Evalu-ation (LREC-COLING 2024) , pages 10117–10123, Torino, Italia. ELRA and ICCL. Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Mered-ith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bern-stein. 2023. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th an-nual acm symposium on user interface software and technology , pages 1–22. Gordon Pennycook and David G Rand. 2019. Lazy, not biased: Susceptibility to partisan fake news is better explained by lack of reasoning than by motivated reasoning. Cognition , 188:39–50. Manuel Pratelli and Marinella Petrocchi. 2025. Evalu-ating the Simulation of Human Personality-Driven Susceptibility to Misinformation with LLMs . IOS Press. Filipe N. Ribeiro, Koustuv Saha, Mahmoudreza Babaei, Lucas Henrique, Johnnatan Messias, Fabricio Ben-evenuto, Oana Goga, Krishna P. Gummadi, and Elissa M. Redmiles. 2019. On microtargeting so-cially divisive ads: A case study of russia-linked ad campaigns on facebook. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-parency , FAT* ’19, page 140–149, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Jon Roozenbeek, Claudia R Schneider, Sarah Dryhurst, John Kerr, Alexandra LJ Freeman, Gabriel Recchia, Anne Marthe Van Der Bles, and Sander Van Der Lin-den. 2020. Susceptibility to misinformation about covid-19 around the world. Royal Society open sci-ence , 7(10):201199. Shibani Santurkar, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Cinoo Lee, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. 2023. Whose opinions do language models reflect? 

Preprint , arXiv:2303.17548. Nikhil Sharma, Q Vera Liao, and Ziang Xiao. 2024. Generative echo chamber? effect of llm-powered search systems on diverse information seeking. In 

Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1–17. Mubashir Sultan, Alan N Tump, Nina Ehmann, Philipp Lorenz-Spreen, Ralph Hertwig, Anton Gollwitzer, and Ralf HJM Kurvers. 2024. Susceptibility to on-line misinformation: A systematic meta-analysis of demographic and psychological factors. Pro-ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,121(47):e2409329121. Charles S Taber and Milton Lodge. 2006. Moti-vated skepticism in the evaluation of political beliefs.              

> American journal of political science , 50(3):755– 769. Jasper Timm, Chetan Talele, and Jacob Haimes. 2025. Tailored truths: Optimizing llm persuasion with per-sonalization and fabricated statistics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.17273 .Jay J Van Bavel, Diego A Reinero, Victoria Spring, Eliz-abeth A Harris, and Annie Duke. 2021. Speaking my truth: Why personal experiences can bridge divides but mislead. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 118(8):e2100280118. Santosh Vijaykumar, Yan Jin, Daniel Rogerson, Xuerong Lu, Swati Sharma, Anna Maughan, Bianca Fadel, Mariella Silva de Oliveira Costa, Claudia Pagliari, and Daniel Morris. 2021. How shades of truth and age affect responses to covid-19 (mis) in-formation: randomized survey experiment among whatsapp users in uk and brazil. Humanities and Social Sciences Communications , 8(1). Herun Wan, Jiaying Wu, Minnan Luo, Zhi Zeng, and Zhixiong Su. 2025. Truth over tricks: Measuring and mitigating shortcut learning in misinformation detection. Preprint , arXiv:2506.02350. Aimei Yang, Alvin Zhou, Jieun Shin, Ke Huang-Isherwood, Wenlin Liu, Chuqing Dong, Eugene Lee, and Jingyi Sun. 2024. Sharing is caring? how moral foundation frames drive the sharing of corrective mes-sages and misinformation about covid-19 vaccines.
> Journal of Computational Social Science , 7(3):2701– 2733. Xuhui Zhou, Hao Zhu, Leena Mathur, Ruohong Zhang, Haofei Yu, Zhengyang Qi, Louis-Philippe Morency, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Graham Neubig, et al. 2023. Sotopia: Interactive evaluation for social intelligence in language agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11667 .

A Taxonomy Dimensions and Imputed Beliefs 

Beliefs are an important tool for modeling demo-graphic simulations in the context of misinforma-tion. Psychological work shows that several be-lief dimensions, such as conspiracy beliefs, polit-ical ideology, trust in science, etc. can help us predict who is most susceptible to misinforma-tion (Ecker et al., 2022; Munusamy et al., 2024). Rather than using only demographic information as a flat category, adding belief profiles provides a more fine-grained representation of how different groups may perceive information. Recent LLM studies also argue for modeling population-level beliefs and preferences to simulate targeted groups, using belief-like representations to approximate hu-man responses at scale (Namikoshi et al., 2024; Kaiser et al., 2025). 

A.1 Taxonomy formation 

We create a belief taxonomy of beliefs consisting of seven core dimensions that are associated with misinformation susceptibility grounded in psycho-logical and cognitive science research: 

(1) Worldview and Identity Beliefs : individuals interpret information through the lens of social identity and worldview (Kahan, 2017; Van Bavel et al., 2021), (2) Epistemic Trust Beliefs : indi-viduals differ systematically in epistemic trust to-ward institutions and experts (De Coninck et al., 2021; Lewandowsky et al., 2023), (3) Cognitive style : individuals vary in cognition, such as re-liance on analytic versus intuitive reasoning (Pen-nycook and Rand, 2019; Ecker et al., 2022), (4) Conspiracy mentality : individuals differ in a gen-eralized predisposition to conspiracies (Douglas et al., 2019; De Coninck et al., 2021), (5) Moral and Value Beliefs : individuals prioritize different moral values (D’Errico et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2024), (6) Emotion-Related Beliefs : individu-als vary in emotional responsiveness (heightened emotional arousal, such as anger or fear may am-plify belief in misinformation) (Brady et al., 2017; McLoughlin et al., 2024) and (7) Heuristic Beliefs :individuals rely to different degrees on shortcuts such as repetition, familiarity, and social endorse-ment (Lin et al., 2016; Fazio, 2020). While the above dimensions have traditionally been studied in isolation and within human popu-lations, we unify them into a structured taxonomy designed for computational modeling. This taxon-omy enables systematic belief simulation in models by providing a framework for collecting and orga-nizing belief data and providing interpretable axes along which belief priors can be instantiated in models. 

A.2 Mapping to Belief Taxonomy. 

We map imputed data to the above belief dimen-sions. We apply exploratory factor analysis on WVS responses to identify latent belief groupings, examining which items naturally cluster together (e.g., trust-related items to Epistemic & Trust Be-liefs). Post that, we conduct a manual review to ensure proper alignment with our taxonomy and validate the final question-to-dimension mapping. Overall, we obtain 126 imputed belief questions across dimensions. Table 10 contains the 126 WVS questions mapped to the 7 belief taxonomy dimen-sions. 

B Datasets 

B.1 Evaluation Data 

For susceptibility evaluation, we use two ground-truth datasets containing human judgments of whether they believe a given claim: (1) PANDORA Dataset from Borah et al. (2025b), containing an-notations from 318 participants. Each participant provided judgments on 3 distinct claims, along with demographic information including age, gen-der, living area, and education. These claims are collected from RumorEval (Gorrell et al., 2019), which consists of true or false rumors covering eight major news events and natural disaster events; (2) MIST dataset from Maertens et al. (2024). From MIST, we use only Study 1 (MIST-1) which in-cludes 409 participants, each providing judgment on the same 100 claims, and demographic informa-tion including age, gender, and education. From the two datasets combined, we obtain 13.8K claims for evaluation. 

B.2 Belief Data 

We collect two complementary belief signals, con-sisting of individually observed belief judgments and group-level (demographic) belief distributions: 

(1) Observed Data - claims that were directly judged by participants in PANDORA and MIST-1 datasets. These responses capture individual-level belief judgments, reflecting each participant’s per-sonal stance rather than demographic group aver-ages. We use two claim judgments as observed be-liefs for each participant (keeping it separate from the evaluation data). This leads to 27.6 claim judg-ments as observed beliefs. 

(2) Imputed Data - inferred from the World Val-ues Survey Wave 7 5 distributions. Imputed data represent demographic belief priors (group–level), inferred from WVS, conditioned solely on demo-graphic attributes. We map these imputed belief items to our belief taxonomy using exploratory factor analysis. This yields 126 imputed belief questions and corresponding demographic distribu-tions. Table 1 shows examples, and Appendix A.2 contains mapping details and all questions. 

> 5https://www.worldvaluessurvey.org/ WVSDocumentationWV7.jsp

Dataset Examples 

MIST: Participant ID : 1 

Participant Demographic Group : d1 

Claim : The Government Is Knowingly Spreading Disease Through the Airwaves and Food Supply 

Participant Choice : fake 

Gold Label : fake 

PANDORA: Participant ID : 1 

Participant Demographic Group : d1 

Claim : News: Updated CDC Covid Numbers Show Only Six Percent of Total US Deaths Actually Dies Solely From Virus. 

Participant Choice : true 

Gold Label : fake 

> Figure 8: Dataset Examples - MIST and PANDORA

Fig 8 shows an example from each MIST and PANDORA datasets. Both datasets are similar, except for the size. Furthermore, MIST does not contain the living area information of the partici-pants, therefore, we do not use it for fine-tuning purposes. 

C Prompt-Based Conditioning 

C.1 Prompt Details 

Fig 10 shows the susceptibility accuracies across the belief and demographic configurations for both datasets. For Imputed cases, we average across all belief dimensions, and Imputed (best) cases, we select the belief dimension that achieves the highest susceptibility accuracy. Findings show that incor-porating belief information consistently improves performance over the zero-shot and demographic-only baselines. We next analyze the impact of spe-cific belief types, demographic ablations, datasets, and model performances. 

C.2 Belief-Dimension Analysis 

Table 4 shows the belief-dimension-wise scores for each dataset and demographic dimension. Across both datasets, single dimensions consis-tently outperform the combined prior, and this is es-Prompt 

You are a persona grounded by attributes: <demographic group>. Past beliefs and priors for this persona (for context, do not re-evaluate them): <beliefs>. When judging a claim, stay consistent with this persona’s prior beliefs where reason-able. 

Figure 9: Prompt Conditioning Experiments 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 

> Accuracy (%)
> Zero-shot
> Demo-only
> Imputed
> Imputed
> (best)
> Observed
> Imp+Obs
> Imp+Obs
> (best)
> Imp+Demo
> Imp+Demo
> (best)
> Obs+Demo
> Imp+Obs+
> Demo
> Imp+Obs+
> Demo(best)
> Setting
> 83.8
> 76.1
> 88.9
> 92.4
> 85.1
> 87.8
> 90.5
> 90.1
> 92.6
> 85.2
> 87.1
> 89.6
> 70.5
> 67.9
> 70.3
> 70.9
> 71.4
> 70.5
> 71.3
> 70.7
> 72.6
> 69.5
> 70.8
> 71.3
> PANDORA
> MIST

Figure 10: Susceptibility Accuracies across settings and datasets 

pecially stark on PANDORA, where all-dimensions collapses to much lower accuracy while the best single dimensions remain high. On Prolific, the top-performing dimensions are fairly stable: emotion-related dominates Gender, while moral-and-value-beliefs is strongest and most frequent for Age and Rural/Urban, and heuris-tic/cognitive beliefs for Education. On MIST, gains from beliefs are smaller but more consistent: win-ners are spread across - top dimensions like moral-and-value, emotion-related, heuristics, etc., still dominate. In addition, worldview-and-identity also does better in MIST. 

C.3 Thematic Analysis 

We perform topic clustering on the news claims to identify latent topical grouping and investigate whether LLM susceptibility accuracies vary across demographics within each topic. We perform this on Dataset 2, as it is much larger and diverse than Dataset 1. Using non-negative matrix factorization on claim texts, we identify five dominant topics: (1) global power, population, and future threats; (2) political leaders and historical rankings; (3) science, health, and technology claims; (4) poli-tics, government, and information-control narra-tives; and (5) public opinion, moral values, and so-cial belief statements. Topic-level analysis shows that susceptibility accuracy is not uniform across demographics. Topics related to political rank-ings and public opinion (Topics 2 and 5) achieve uniformly high accuracy across all demographic groups, resulting in negligible age, gender, or edu-cation gaps. Contrastingly, science/health claims and government-related narratives (Topics 3 and 4) exhibit the largest demographic variation, with older and higher-education groups generally achiev-ing higher accuracy. Gender-based differences are minimal across all topics. Table 5 shows results across some topics and models showing differences across demographics. These findings suggest that demographic sus-ceptibility in LLMs is not just a broad, identity-driven phenomenon but also contextual and topic-sensitive. This also aligns with interdisciplinary work in psychology and communication suggesting that demographic susceptibility to misinformation is highly context-dependent. Prior studies show that gender alone is a weak predictor of misinfor-mation belief, with analytic thinking and reason-ing style playing a much larger role (Marinescu et al., 2018). In contrast, age and education de-mographics differ more for complex or ambiguous claims, particularly in science and policy domains, consistent with work on cognitive processing, and motivated reasoning (Kahan, 2017). From a cogni-tive perspective, this pattern supports dual-process theories of reasoning, whereby strong lexical re-duce individual differences, while inference-heavy claims amplify them (Evans and Stanovich, 2013). 

C.4 Ablations using belief-distributions 

In our main experiments, we utilize modal re-sponses for prompt conditioning. Here, we per-form ablations that use belief distributions instead of modal responses in prompts. Table 6 shows the results comparing both modal and distribution-based prompting in llama-3.1-8b-instruct .We observe that distribution-based conditioning Dataset Dimension Gender Age Education Rural/Urban Prolific-dataset                                                         

> worldview_and_identity 89.20625 90.19875 69.54372184 90.71375 epistmetic_and_trust_beliefs 85.515 89.2575 84.96031741 89.0475 cognitive_style_beliefs 89.0875 88.69 84.76190471 87.6575 conspiracy_mindset 83.25375 89.0475 85 86.985 moral_and_value_beliefs 90.15875 90.19875 84.36507924 90.72375 emotion_related 88.3811111 89.545 85.31746026 89.08625 heurisitics 86.78625 90.00125 86.38888875 90.555 alldimensions 73.74625 88.96875 85.95238095 89.26
> MIST-dataset
> worldview_and_identity 71.66125 72.49375 71.65924606 epistmetic_and_trust_beliefs 71.68 71.5875 71.47649656 cognitive_style_beliefs 71.27458333 71.91125 71.35596075 conspiracy_mindset 71.1875 71.64 71.26027066 moral_and_value_beliefs 71.02625 71.99 70.52219001 emotion_related 71.2175 71.43 70.75732404 heurisitics 71.85875 72.09125 71.80576158 alldimensions 71.50958333 71.74125 71.18524694
> Table 4: Belief Dimension Analysis

consistently yields lower accuracies. This likely re-flects the increased ambiguity and noise introduced when conditioning on heterogeneous belief signals, suggesting that modal beliefs provide a clearer and more stable prior for simulation-based prompting. Future work can further investigate this. 

D Fine-tuning Analysis 

D.1 Phase 1 results 

For Phase 1, Table 7 shows that Qwen has the lowest KL divergence, followed by Mistral and Llama for both settings - head tuning and full-fine-tuning. With LoRA-ft, the trends remain similar but slightly lower than head-ft. This indicates that Qwen more faithfully captures population-level be-lief distributions, a critical property for reliable downstream simulation of demographic misinfor-mation susceptibility. Other models also perform competitively, suggesting that most models LLMs can capture belief distributions to a reasonable ex-tent. 

D.2 Phase 2 results 

Table 8 shows susceptibility accuracies and F1 scores across different setups and models. Across methods, the key finding is that cross-study (MIST-2) generalization improves drastically once we move from 1-phase to 2-phase pipelines. The 1-phase baseline model perform decent, however, the performance drops sharply on MIST-2. For MIST-2, our BAFT approach performs the best, showing that belief adapter + lightweight susceptibility head captures more transferable signals aligned with out-of-domain data. Comparing the 2-phase variants, we find that BAFT remains the strongest on MIST-2, however, LoRA-ft slightly improves on PANDORA+MIST-1 but gives weaker transfer. This may be due to mild overfitting when more parameters are updated. Across models, Qwen consistently performs the best for 2-phase settings. Overall, the 2-phase train-ing approach is helpful improving robustness and also adapting to out-of-domain data. 

D.3 Shortcut Reliance Experiments 

Table 9 shows that shortcut reliance is low, espe-cially under head tuning. We measure flip-rate: the fraction of evaluation examples for which the model’s predicted label changes when a shortcut feature is removed or perturbed, and Probability Delta: the average absolute change in the model’s predicted probability for the original class after the shortcut is removed. On PROLIFIC+MIST-1, head-tuned models (llama, qwen and mistral) show near-zero flip rates, indicating that removing the shortcut signal has little effect on predicted la-bels. Full fine-tuning also tends to have small flip rates and probability deltas in-domain, but they are more frequently non-zero (e.g., llama/mistral flip more than head tuning), consistent with the idea that updating more parameters can slightly increase sensitivity to spurious cues. On MIST-2, the most notable shortcut sensitiv-ity appears for qwen under full fine-tuning (flip Demographic Model Topic/Theme Effect and Notes Age 

Llama-3-8B New study & ideology (T1) +2.8 ppts ( 60 + − < 30 ). Older: 0.984 vs younger: 0.956. Llama-3-8B Global threats & population (T2) +2.0 ppts. Older: 0.961 vs younger: 0.941. Llama-3-8B Marijuana/new-study (T4) +1.7 ppts. 60+ group: 0.947 vs <30: 0.930. Qwen-2.5-14B Marijuana/new-study (T4) +2.5 ppts. 60+ group: 0.917 vs <30: 0.892. Mistral-7B All topics <0.5 ppts. Age differences negligible. 

Education 

Llama-3-8B Sleep/blue-light health (T2) +8.4 ppts. Completed: 0.918 vs not: 0.833 (six cases). Qwen-2.5-14B Politics/elections (T3) +16.7 ppts. Completed perfect; not-completed: 0.833 (six cases). Llama-3-8B Marijuana/new-study (T4) +0.9 ppts. Difference: 0.962 vs 0.953. Mistral-7B Marijuana/new-study (T4) +0.2 ppts. Effect negligible. All models Other topics <= 0.0–0.2 ppts. No meaningful education effect. 

Gender 

Llama-3-8B Global influence/future threats (T0) ≤ 2 ppts ( |F − M |). Nearly identical accuracies. Llama-3-8B Science & health claims (T2) ≤ 2 ppts. No consistent female–male separation. Llama-3-8B Public opinion/social beliefs (T4) ≈ 0 ppts. Near-ceiling for both genders. Mistral-7B Global influence/future threats (T0) ≈ 0 ppts. Accuracies overlap almost exactly. Mistral-7B Marijuana/public opinion (T4) ≤ 1 ppt. No directional trend. Qwen-2.5-14B All topics 0 ppts. Identical accuracies across all topics. 

Table 5: Thematic Analysis across Demographic 

Data Demo Group Zero Demo Imputed Observed Imp+Obs Imp Obs Imp+Obs -shot only only only only +Demo +Demo +Demo 

PANDORA (Llama 3.1) age (mean) 72.74 81.86 84.84 77.88 75.22 85.74 72.12 70.80 PANDORA (Llama 3.1) age (dist) 72.74 81.86 0.75 79.65 63.72 77.43 73.45 65.93 PANDORA (Llama 3.1) gender (mean) 73.19 82.74 87.40 77.88 86.73 88.30 76.55 81.42 PANDORA (Llama 3.1) gender (dist) 73.19 82.74 79.65 79.65 82.30 77.43 76.99 80.53 PANDORA (Llama 3.1) livingarea (mean) 84.07 80.53 87.61 74.78 75.66 88.40 72.12 70.80 PANDORA (Llama 3.1) livingarea (dist) 84.07 80.53 70.80 80.09 58.85 74.78 72.12 64.60 

Table 6: PANDORA results for Llama 3.1. Mean = modal belief conditioning; Dist = belief distribution conditioning. Best value per row is in bold. 

Model Head Tuning Full Fine-tuning 

Qwen 0.0511 0.0732 Mistral 0.087 0.107 Llama 0.287 0.487 

Table 7: KL divergence comparison across different models and tuning methods. 

rate 0.1098, larger prob delta), whereas the corre-sponding head-tuned Qwen model shows 0 flip rate. This pattern supports the our previous findings that two-phase-head-only training is more robust: it preserves performance while reducing reliance on shortcut features that do not transfer. 

D.4 Training Details D.4.1 2-phase Head-FT details 

Phase 1 trains a belief adapter to predict demographic-conditioned WVS response distribu-tions. The model is a frozen encoder with a train-able linear head mapping the last-token hidden state to 10 logits, followed by softmax. Training uses 

Belief Modeling Prompt 

You are modeling belief distributions for a single demographic group. Demographic : d1 Question: q1 There are k possible response options, num-bered 1 through k. Predict the probability for each option. 

Figure 11: Prompt for Phase-1 Belief Modeling 

AdamW (lr 5 × 10 −4, batch size 16, 2 epochs) and optimizes a scale-aware KL divergence loss, computed only over the valid bins 1..K for each example. For evaluation, we test generalization to unseen belief items, reporting KL distributional fit and majority-category accuracy. Model PANDORA+MIST-1 MIST-2 Acc F1 Acc F1 Baseline (1-phase)                                     

> llama 0.750 0.751 0.680 0.673 qwen 0.760 0.761 0.720 0.712 mistral 0.740 0.761 0.650 0.653
> LoRA-FT (2-phase)
> llama 0.809 0.809 0.876 0.861 qwen 0.800 0.800 0.893 0.892 mistral 0.800 0.790 0.887 0.867
> BAFT
> llama 0.793 0.793 0.884 0.896 qwen 0.792 0.791 0.924 0.906 mistral 0.792 0.792 0.884 0.923
> Table 8: Fine-tuning performances

Phase 2 trains a susceptibility prediction head on top of a frozen belief adapter learned in Phase 1. The model combines a frozen base encoder and frozen belief head to produce both a seman-tic representation of the input and a demographic-conditioned belief probability vector. These two are concatenated and fed into a lightweight, train-able classification head. We format the inputs as instruction-following prompts that include a de-mographic persona and up to two belief examples. During training, only the susceptibility head param-eters are updated using cross-entropy loss, while the base model and belief adapter remain frozen. The model is optimized with AdamW (learning rate ( 5 × 10 −4), batch size 8) for 2 epochs, with reproducible initialization via fixed random seeds. We finally evaluate at each epoch using accuracy and macro-F1. 

D.4.2 2-phase LoRA-FT details 

Here, we use Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) for parameter-efficient fine-tuning in both phases. In Phase 1, LoRA enables the model to adapt its rep-resentations to capture demographic belief distri-butions. In Phase 2, LoRA is again applied to the base model during susceptibility training, allowing the model to adjust task-relevant representations while keeping the number of trainable parameters small. 

E Significance Tests Across Experiments 

Prompt-based Conditioning (Susceptibility Ac-curacy) : Conditioning LLMs with belief informa-tion improves demographic susceptibility simula-tion compared to zero-shot and demo-only prompts. We averaged our findings across 3 individual runs, and improvements of belief settings are statistically significant (paired t-test, p < 0.05 for both PAN-DORA and MIST-1). 

Belief Dimension Analysis. Certain belief dimen-sions are more predictive of susceptibility than others. We use repeated-measures ANOVA and performance variation vary significantly by be-lief dimensions, more for PANDORA, with a few non-significant variation for MIST (congitive, and alldimensions). 

Post-Training Adaptation In PANDORA+MIST-1, accuracy differences between baseline and the 2- phase methods are modest (e.g., 0.75 vs. 0.793 for llama), and z -tests show that both BAFT and LoRA fine -tuning significantly outperforms the baseline (p=0.02–0.03). On MIST - 2 the gains are pronounced: for llama the baseline accuracy is 0.680 while BAFT reaches 0.884 and LoRA -FT 0.876. Two -proportion z - tests show that both BAFT and LoRA - FT significantly outperform the baseline (p<0.001). 

F Model Choices, Implementation Details and Computational Resources 

We conduct experiments using instruction-tuned LLMs including LLaMA, Qwen, and Mistral, im-plemented with the Hugging Face Transformers and PEFT libraries. Our framework adopts a mod-ular design with explicit belief heads and suscepti-bility heads, and employs LoRA-based fine-tuning where base-model adaptation is required, while relying on lightweight head training in BAFT to decouple belief modeling from susceptibility pre-diction. All experiments are run on NVIDIA A40 GPUs with a maximum sequence length of 1024 tokens and fixed random seeds to ensure repro-ducibility and computational efficiency. 

G Reproducibility 

We open-source our codes and data, which are up-loaded to the submission system. This would help future work to reproduce our results and explore Be-liefSim: demographic-aware misinformation sus-ceptibility simulation in LLMs using belief-priors, and BAFT. Method Model PANDORA+MIST-1 MIST-2 Flip Rate Prob Delta Acc Drop Flip Rate Prob Delta Acc Drop 

Full-FT Llama 0.0239 0.0148 0.0049 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Qwen 0.0173 0.0476 0.0012 0.1098 0.0700 0.1027 Mistral 0.0323 0.0024 0.0000 0.0000 0.0129 0.0000 Head Tuning Llama 0.0000 0.0125 0.0000 0.0000 0.0129 0.0000 Qwen 0.0080 0.0261 0.0012 0.0000 0.0427 0.0000 Mistral 0.0000 0.0071 0.0000 0.0000 0.0069 0.0000 

Table 9: Shortcut reliance comparison between Full Fine-tuning and Head Tuning across different models on PANDORA+MIST-1 and MIST-2 datasets. Table 10: World Values Survey Questions mapped to Misinformation Taxonomy Dimensions 

Dimension Q ID Question WorldView and Identity Beliefs 

Q6 Importance of religion (1=Very important to 4=Not at all important) Q4 Importance of politics (1=Very important to 4=Not at all important) Q171 Frequency of religious service attendance (1=More than once/week to 7=Never) Q173 Religious self-identification (1=Religious person, 2=Not religious, 3=Atheist) Q240 Political left-right scale (1-10) Q254 National pride (1=Very proud to 4=Not at all proud, 5=Not from US) Q255-Q259 Closeness to village/region/country/continent/world (1=Very close to 4=Not close at all) Q19, Q23 Unwanted neighbors: different race, different religion (1=Don’t want, 2=Want) Q235-Q239 Views on government styles: strong leader, technocracy, army rule, democracy, religious law (1=Very good to 4=Very bad) Q241-Q249 Essential characteristics of democracy: tax/subsidize, religious law interpretation, free elections, unemployment aid, army takeover, civil rights, income equality, obedience, women’s rights (1-10 scale) 

Epistemic and Trust Beliefs 

Q57 General trust in people (1=Most can be trusted, 2=Need to be careful) Q58-Q63 Trust in family, neighborhood, people you know, first-time meetings, other religions, other nationalities (1=Trust completely to 4=Don’t trust at all) Q69, Q71, Q75 Confidence in police, government, universities (1=A great deal to 4=None at all) Q158-Q163 Views on science and technology: health/comfort, opportunities, faith vs science, moral breakdown, daily relevance, world better/worse (1-10 scale) 

Cognitive Style Beliefs 

Q152-Q153 Priority ranking: economic growth, defense forces, participation in decisions, beautification (select most and next most important) Q154-Q155 Priority ranking: order, participation, fighting prices, free speech (select most and next most important) Q156-Q157 Priority ranking: stable economy, humane society, ideas over money, fight crime (select most and next most important) Q176 Moral uncertainty: trouble deciding which moral rules are right (1-10 scale) 

Conspiracy Mindset 

Q112 Perceived corruption level in country (1=No corruption to 10=Abundant corruption) Q113-Q117 Corruption beliefs about state authorities, business executives, local authorities, civil service providers, journalists/media (1=None to 4=All of them) Q118 Frequency of bribery needed for services (1=Never to 4=Always) 

Moral and Value Beliefs 

Q176 Moral uncertainty (1-10 scale) Q177-Q195 Justifiability of: claiming unentitled benefits, fare evasion, stealing, tax cheating, bribery, homosexuality, prostitution, abortion, divorce, premarital sex, suicide, euthanasia, wife beating, child beating, violence, terrorism, casual sex, political violence, death penalty (1=Never justifiable to 10=Always justifiable) 

Emotion Related 

Q44-Q45 Views on technology development and respect for authority (1=Good, 2=Don’t mind, 3=Bad) Q46 Happiness level (1=Very happy to 4=Not at all happy) Q47 Health status (1=Very good to 5=Very poor) Q48 Freedom of choice and control over life (1=No choice to 10=Great deal of choice) Q49-Q50 Life satisfaction and financial satisfaction (1=Completely dissatisfied to 10=Completely satisfied) Q52 Felt unsafe from crime in last 12 months (1=Often to 4=Never) Q131 General security feeling (1=Very secure to 4=Not at all secure) Q146-Q148 Worry about war, terrorist attack, civil war (1=Very much to 4=Not at all) 

Heuristic 

Q94-Q104 Active membership in: church/religious, sports/recreation, arts/music/education, labor union, political party, environmental, professional, humanitarian/charity, consumer, self-help/mutual aid, women’s groups (1=Inactive, 2=Active, 3=Don’t belong) Q201-Q208 Media/communication usage: newspaper, TV news, radio news, mobile phone, email, internet, social media, talking with friends (1=Daily to 5=Never) Q18-Q26 Unwanted neighbors: drug addicts, different race, AIDS, immigrants, homosexuals, different religion, heavy drinkers, unmarried couples, different language (1=Don’t want, 2=Want) Q29-Q31 Gender attitudes: men as better political leaders, university more important for boys, men as better business executives (1=Strongly agree to 4=Strongly disagree) Q33-Q35 Job/gender attitudes: men’s right to jobs when scarce, natives over immigrants, woman earning more causes problems (1=Strongly agree to 5=Strongly disagree)