Title: Multi-TAP: Multi-criteria Target Adaptive Persona Modeling for Cross-Domain Recommendation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.07086v1

Published Time: Tue, 10 Mar 2026 00:35:36 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# Multi-TAP: Multi-criteria Target Adaptive Persona Modeling for Cross-Domain Recommendation 

# Daehee Kang 

Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) Ulsan, South Korea kangdaehee@unist.ac.kr 

# Yeon-Chang Lee ∗

Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) Ulsan, South Korea yeonchang@unist.ac.kr 

## Abstract 

Cross-domain recommendation (CDR) aims to alleviate data spar-sity by transferring knowledge across domains, yet existing meth-ods primarily rely on coarse-grained behavioral signals and often overlook intra-domain heterogeneity in user preferences. We pro-pose Multi-TAP , a multi-criteria target-adaptive persona frame-work that explicitly captures such heterogeneity through semantic persona modeling. To enable effective transfer, Multi-TAP selec-tively incorporates source-domain signals conditioned on the target domain, preserving relevance during knowledge transfer. Exper-iments on real-world datasets demonstrate that Multi-TAP con-sistently outperforms state-of-the-art CDR methods, highlighting the importance of modeling intra-domain heterogeneity for ro-bust cross-domain recommendation. The codebase of Multi-TAP 

is currently available at https://github.com/archivehee/Multi-TAP. 

## 1 Introduction 

Background. Cross-domain recommendation (CDR) has emerged as a promising paradigm for alleviating data sparsity in recom-mendation systems by leveraging user interactions from data-rich source domains to improve recommendation accuracy in data-scarce target domains [ 2 , 21 , 31 , 37 , 39 , 46 ]. As modern e-commerce platforms ( e.g. , Amazon, eBay) typically span multiple domains such as electronics, clothing, and books, CDR has been extensively studied as a practical solution beyond single-domain recommen-dation. Most existing CDR approaches [ 26 , 47 , 48 ] are built upon a 

common assumption that user preferences exhibit a certain degree of consistency across domains , such that knowledge learned from a source domain can be effectively transferred to a target domain. Under this assumption, prior studies have focused on how to bridge the representational gap between domains, where user repre-sentations learned from one domain cannot be directly generalized to another. Early approaches [ 2, 15 , 29 , 44 , 45 ], including EMCDR [ 2 ]and SA-VAE [ 29 ], rely on overlapping users to learn mapping func-tions that align source- and target-domain user representations. More recent work [ 3, 4 , 9, 22 , 27 , 36 ], including UniCDR [ 3 ] and EDDA [ 27 ], adopt preference decomposition or shared latent space learning to disentangle domain-shared and domain-specific prefer-ences . Despite these advances, existing CDR methods primarily 

transfer preferences at the domain level , relying on a uni-fied representation that aggregates behaviors within each domain, which inevitably compresses context-dependent preference signals. 

Motivation. However, we argue that a more fundamental issue underlies these limitations: the assumption of homogeneous user 

> ∗Corresponding authors.

Figure 1: Preference shift ratios across price-based user groups within the Electronics domain. It reports the pro-portion of users whose relative price preference shifts when moving from a source category ( Computer or Home Audio ) to different target categories, averaged across target categories, using price as an example of a preference criterion. 

preferences does not hold even within a single domain. Our empir-ical analysis on large-scale real-world datasets shows that users exhibit intra-domain heterogeneity , manifested as divergent con-sumption behaviors across categories within the same domain (see Figure 1), as detailed in Section 2. For example, in the Electronics do-main, many users who interact with higher-priced items in one cat-egory ( e.g. , Computer ) frequently shift to budget options in another (e.g. , Home Audio ), while also exhibiting category-specific sensitiv-ity to other preference criteria beyond price, such as popularity and ratings. Given that a single domain in large-scale e-commerce plat-forms such as Amazon encompasses many fine-grained categories, such preference shifts across categories arise systematically. These observations motivate a rethinking of the CDR problem. Rather than asking how to transfer user preferences across domains, the critical question is which preferences should be transferred, which in turn requires preserving fine-grained, domain-specific consumption intents. By overlooking intra-domain heterogeneity, existing CDR methods typically fail to capture fine-grained pref-erence structures in both the source and target domains, leading to substantial information loss even before cross-domain transfer is performed. Consequently, transferring or sharing these com-pressed representations across domains further exacerbates this loss, resulting in indiscriminate cross-domain transfer. 

Proposed Ideas. To address these challenges, we propose a novel CDR framework, named Multi-TAP (Multi -criteria Target-Adapti ve Persona). The key idea of Multi-TAP is to explicitly decompose user preferences along multiple preference criteria within each do-main to construct user personas, and to selectively transfer only the personas that are relevant to the target domain. Multi-TAP consists of two main phases: (P1) Multi-criteria Persona Modeling and 

(P2) Target-adaptive Doppelganger Transfer .

> arXiv:2603.07086v1 [cs.HC] 7 Mar 2026 Daehee Kang and Yeon-Chang Lee

The first phase, Multi-criteria Persona Modeling , focuses on modeling fine-grained user preferences within each model. Leverag-ing user-item interactions and item metadata within each domain, we employ a Large Language Model (LLM) to generate multiple natural language persona descriptions for each user, each reflecting distinct consumption intents associated with different preference criteria ( e.g. , price sensitivity, popularity bias, and category pref-erence). These textual personas are then encoded and aggregated via a self-attention mechanism, producing a single criterion-aware persona embedding for each user in each domain. The second phase, Target-adaptive Doppelganger Transfer ,performs selective cross-domain transfer at the persona level. Given each user’s domain-specific persona embeddings obtained from the previous phase, we introduce a doppelganger persona , a newly created persona embedding in the source domain designed to mir-ror the corresponding target-domain persona and enable cross-domain transfer. By transferring only these doppelganger personas rather than entire source-domain personas, we avoid indiscriminate knowledge transfer and better preserve domain-specific preference structures in the target domain. Once the source and target domains are specified, Multi-TAP 

executes the two phases to construct a target-domain persona em-bedding for each user, selectively enriched with source-domain information via doppelganger personas. Final recommendations are generated by computing matching scores between the resulting user representations and target-domain items. 

Contributions. Our contributions are as follows: 

• Key Empirical Observation. We identify the problem of intra-domain heterogeneity in cross-domain recommendation. 

• Novel CDR Framework. We propose Multi-TAP , a new CDR framework that captures intra-domain heterogeneity via multi-criteria persona modeling and enables selective transfer through target-adaptive doppelganger personas. 

• Extensive Experiments. Extensive experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate that Multi-TAP consistently outperforms five state-of-the-art CDR methods up to 36.3% in HR@5. 

## 2 Motivation 

In this section, we formalize the notion of intra-domain heterogene-ity, develop quantitative measures to characterize it, and empirically analyze its prevalence in real-world CDR datasets. 

Definition. In CDR, user preferences are commonly assumed to be homogeneous within each domain, such that a single domain-level representation can adequately summarize a user’s behavior [ 26 , 47 , 48 ]. However, this assumption conflicts with behavioral science theories such as Ajzen’s Theory of Planned Behavior [ 1], which argue that observed behaviors arise from multiple latent intentions shaped by context, rather than a single, stable preference. In recommendation systems, such contextual variation naturally arises even within a single domain, as users may express different preference criteria across categories associated with distinct con-sumption contexts. We refer to this phenomenon as intra-domain heterogeneity (IDH) . IDH implies that aggregating interactions into a single domain-level representation leads to representation compression, masking fine-grained preference signals. This issue is particularly critical in CDR, where such compressed representations are further transferred across domains. 

Measurement. To analyze IDH, we adopt a criterion-specific view of user preferences and develop quantitative measures to charac-terize category-level preference preservation. Formally, we consider a domain 𝑑 , associated with a user set 

U𝑑 , an item set I𝑑 , and a category set C𝑑 , where each item 𝑖 ∈ I 𝑑 

belongs to a category 𝑐 ∈ C 𝑑 . In this section, we focus on a set K

of three preference criteria : price sensitivity, quality preference, and popularity bias, each of which is derived from commonly available item-level metadata such as price, average user ratings, and interac-tion counts, respectively. For each category 𝑐 ∈ C 𝑑 and preference criterion 𝑘 ∈ K , we discretize each item 𝑖 ’s criterion value into three ordinal bins, denoted as bin (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

, based on the category-wise tertiles of the empirical distribution as follows:                               

> bin (𝑘 )
> 𝑖 =
> 
> 1,𝑥 (𝑘 )
> 𝑖 <𝑄 (𝑘 )
> 𝑐 (1/3),
> 2,𝑄 (𝑘 )
> 𝑐 (1/3) ≤ 𝑥 (𝑘 )
> 𝑖 <𝑄 (𝑘 )
> 𝑐 (2/3),
> 3,𝑥 (𝑘 )
> 𝑖 ≥𝑄 (𝑘 )
> 𝑐 (2/3),
> (1)

where 𝑥 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

denotes the raw metadata value of item 𝑖 under 𝑘 ,and 𝑄 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑐

(𝑞 ) denotes the 𝑞 -th quantile of the empirical distribu-tion within 𝑐 . This discretization normalizes criterion scales across categories and enables consistent comparison of preferences. We then define the criterion-specific preference score 𝑠 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑢,𝑐

of user 𝑢 for category 𝑐 under criterion 𝑘 as follows:           

> 𝑠 (𝑘 )
> 𝑢,𝑐 =1
> | I 𝑢,𝑐 |∑︁ 𝑖 ∈I 𝑢,𝑐
> bin (𝑘 )
> 𝑖 ,(2)

where I𝑢,𝑐 denotes the set of items that user 𝑢 has interacted with in category 𝑐 , and bin (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

∈ { 1, 2, 3} denotes the ordinal value of item 

𝑖 under criterion 𝑘 , corresponding to the low, medium, and high bins, respectively. Intuitively, a larger value of 𝑠 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑢,𝑐

indicates that user 𝑢 tends to interact with items associated with higher levels of criterion 𝑘 within category 𝑐 . For example, when 𝑘 corresponds to price, a higher 𝑠 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑢,𝑐

implies that user 𝑢 predominantly interacts with relatively high-priced items in category 𝑐 , whereas a lower value indicates a preference for more budget-oriented items. Based on 𝑠 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑢,𝑐

, we further associate each user 𝑢 with an ordi-nal preference label ℓ (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑢,𝑐

∈ { Low , Medium , High } for category 

𝑐 under criterion 𝑘 , where the labels are assigned according to the category-wise tertile thresholds induced by 𝑄 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑐

(𝑞 ), as used in Eq. (1). This label indicates the user’s dominant consumption tendency within that category and provides an interpretable ab-straction of user preferences at the category level. Finally, we quantify how consistently users preserve their dom-inant preference tendencies across categories. For a criterion 𝑘 

and a label 𝑔 ∈ { Low , Medium , High }, we define the conditional preservation ratio from category 𝑐 𝑏 to 𝑐 𝑡 as follows:                            

> 𝑅 (𝑘 )
> 𝑔 (𝑐 𝑏 →𝑐 𝑡 )=
> Í𝑢 ∈U 𝑐 𝑏 ,𝑐𝑡 I
> 
> ℓ(𝑘 )
> 𝑢,𝑐 𝑏 =𝑔 ∧ℓ(𝑘 )
> 𝑢,𝑐𝑡 =𝑔
> Í𝑢 ∈U 𝑐 𝑏 ,𝑐𝑡 I
> 
> ℓ(𝑘 )
> 𝑢,𝑐 𝑏 =𝑔
> ,(3)

where U𝑐 𝑏 ,𝑐 𝑡 denotes users who interacted with items in both cate-gories. The ratio measures the fraction of users labeled as 𝑔 in 𝑐 𝑏 

who retain the same label in 𝑐 𝑡 under criterion 𝑘 , and is asymmetric, 

i.e. , 𝑅 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑔

(𝑐 𝑏 → 𝑐 𝑡 ) ≠ 𝑅 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑔

(𝑐 𝑡 → 𝑐 𝑏 ). Lower values indicate weaker preservation and stronger intra-domain heterogeneity. Multi-TAP: Multi-criteria Target Adaptive Persona Modeling for Cross-Domain Recommendation 

Figure 2: Intra-domain preference heterogeneity across categories. Each heatmap visualizes the conditional preference preser-vation ratio, measuring how consistently users maintain their dominant preference label when moving from a base category (𝒚 -axis) to a compared category ( 𝒙 -axis). Each cell represents the fraction of users who are assigned to a specific preference group (High or Low) in the base category and remain in the same group in the compared category. Lower values indicate weaker preference preservation and stronger intra-domain heterogeneity. Observations. Figures 2-(a) and -(b) show price- and popularity-based preference preservation across selected categories in the Electronics and Sports domains, respectively. For clarity of presen-tation, we visualize representative category pairs and preference criteria in the main paper, while additional results across other domains, categories, and criteria are provided in Appendix B .As shown in Figure 2, users’ dominant consumption tendencies are only weakly preserved across categories, revealing substantial 

intra-domain heterogeneity . Across both domains, preservation ra-tios are generally low, indicating that user preferences under a given criterion frequently change when moving between categories. For example, in the Electronics domain, users who exhibit high-price purchasing behavior in one category often fail to maintain the same tendency in others. In several category pairs, such as Car and GPS ,the preservation ratio drops to around 31%, suggesting that price sensitivity is highly category-dependent. This effect is even more pronounced among low-price–oriented users, whose preservation ratios frequently fall below those of high-price users. These results provide strong empirical evidence of IDH. Such structural heterogeneity implies that domain-level user represen-tations inevitably compress context-dependent preference signals, underscoring the need for fine-grained, criterion-aware modeling prior to effective cross-domain transfer. 

## 3 The Proposed Framework: Multi-TAP 

In this section, we present Multi-TAP , a novel framework for cross-domain recommendation. Section 3.1 introduces the overall pro-cedure of Multi-TAP , Sections 3.2 and 3.3 describe its two core phases, and Section 3.4 details the training objective. 

## 3.1 Overview 

We consider a CDR setting with a source domain 𝑑 𝑠 and a target domain 𝑑 𝑡 , where each domain 𝑑 ∈ { 𝑑 𝑠 , 𝑑 𝑡 } is associated with a user set U𝑑 and an item set I𝑑 . Accordingly, we denote the user sets in 

𝑑 𝑠 and 𝑑 𝑡 as U𝑠 and U𝑡 , and the corresponding item sets as I𝑠 and 

I𝑡 , respectively. The two domains share a subset of users, denoted as U𝑜 = U𝑠 ∩ U 𝑡 . Each item 𝑖 ∈ I 𝑑 is associated with metadata attributes ( e.g. , category, price, and store). Given observed user-item interactions in both domains, the goal of CDR is to improve recommendation accuracy in the target domain 𝑑 𝑡 , particularly for overlapping users 𝑢 ∈ U 𝑜 , by leveraging information from 𝑑 𝑠 .Figure 3 illustrates the overall architecture of Multi-TAP . The framework consists of two phases: (P1) Multi-criteria Persona Modeling (Figure 3-(a)), which constructs criterion-aware user representations within each domain, and (P2) Target-adaptive Doppelganger Transfer (Figure 3-(b)), which selectively transfers source-domain preference signals in a target-adaptive manner. In (P1), Multi-TAP models user preferences within each domain by explicitly decomposing them along multiple preference criteria. For each overlapping user 𝑢 ∈ U 𝑜 , we leverage a large language model (LLM) to assist the construction of criterion-specific persona embeddings e(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑢 𝑠

and e(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑢 𝑡

for the source and target domains, along different preference criteria 𝑘 ∈ K . These personas are aggregated into domain-specific persona embeddings h𝑢 𝑠 and h𝑢 𝑡 .In (P2), Multi-TAP performs selective cross-domain transfer via a target-adaptive doppelganger mechanism. For each overlap-ping user 𝑢 ∈ U 𝑜 , we construct a doppelganger embedding ˜h𝑢 𝑡 

in the target domain. Initialized from h𝑢 𝑡 , it selectively absorbs transferable preference signals from the source persona embedding Daehee Kang and Yeon-Chang Lee 

Figure 3: Overview of Multi-TAP , which consists of (P1) Multi-criteria Persona Modeling, and (P2) Target-adaptive Doppelganger Transfer. In (P1), Multi-TAP decomposes user preferences into explicit, criterion-aware multi-persona embeddings by leveraging a user persona database constructed from interaction histories and item metadata. In (P2), Multi-TAP selectively incorporates source-domain information by instantiating doppelganger persona aligned with the target-domain persona embedding. Table 1: Key notations used in this paper                                

> Notation Description
> 𝑑 𝑠 , 𝑑 𝑡 Source and target domains
> U𝑠 ,U𝑡 ,U𝑜 User sets in the source and target domains, and the overlapping user set
> I𝑠 ,I𝑡 Item sets in the source and target domains
> C𝑠 ,C𝑡 Set of item categories in source and target domains
> KSet of preference criteria
> D𝑢,𝑠 ,D𝑢,𝑡 User persona database in the source and target domains
> e(𝑘 )
> 𝑢 𝑠 ,e(𝑘 )
> 𝑢 𝑡 Criterion-specific user embeddings in the source and target domains
> h𝑢 𝑠 ,h𝑢 𝑡 Persona-aware user embeddings in the source and target domains
> h𝑖 𝑠 ,h𝑖 𝑡 Semantic item embeddings in the source and target domains
> ˜h𝑢 𝑡 Target-adaptive doppelganger embedding of user 𝑢

h𝑢 𝑠 . The transfer from 𝑑 𝑠 to 𝑑 𝑡 is realized by aligning h𝑢 𝑡 with its doppelganger embedding ˜h𝑢 𝑡 through a contrastive objective. Finally, Multi-TAP jointly optimizes the target-domain recom-mendation and transfer objectives, where recommendations are generated by matching the learned target-domain user representa-tions with item embeddings in the target domain. Table 1 summa-rizes a list of notations used in this paper. 

## 3.2 Multi-criteria Persona Modeling 

The goal of (P1) is to model fine-grained user preferences within each domain by explicitly accounting for intra-domain heterogene-ity (IDH). Rather than representing a user with a single domain-level embedding, we decompose user preferences along multiple interpretable preference criteria and construct criterion-specific personas. To facilitate this decomposition in a structured and inter-pretable manner, we leverage an LLM as an auxiliary module for generating preference-aware persona descriptions, rather than as an end-to-end profiling engine. This phase is performed independently for the source and target domains and provides the foundation for selective cross-domain transfer in the subsequent phase. For nota-tional simplicity, we use the notation of a domain 𝑑 , regardless of whether it refers to the source or target domain. 

Step 1: Building User Persona Database. We first organize user interaction data into a persona database that serves as the struc-tured input for persona construction. For each user 𝑢 ∈ U 𝑑 , we collect the user’s interaction history along with the category-level metadata associated with each interaction. Based on these meta-data, we identify five preference criteria that consistently charac-terize IDH in real-world e-commerce platforms: price sensitivity (PS), quality preference (QP), popularity bias (PB), category diversity (CD) , and category familiarity (CF) .Specifically, price, average rating, and interaction counts are observed as category-level metadata and are directly interpreted as user-specific preference tendencies within each category, cor-responding to price sensitivity, quality preference, and popularity bias. Accordingly, we directly reuse the corresponding ordinal pref-erence labels ℓ (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑢,𝑐

introduced in Section 2. Beyond these item-centric criteria, we further introduce two category-level behavioral criteria, i.e. , category diversity and cate-gory familiarity, to capture complementary aspects of users’ con-sumption patterns that cannot be inferred from item attributes alone. We now formalize these category-level behavioral criteria. 

Category diversity measures the breadth of a user’s consumption by quantifying how many distinct categories the user interacts with within a domain, relative to other users. Formally, category diversity 𝑥 𝑢,𝑑 for a user 𝑢 in domain 𝑑 is defined as follows:         

> 𝑥 𝑢,𝑑 =𝜙 (𝑖 ) | 𝑖 ∈ I 𝑢,𝑑 ,(4)

where 𝜙 (𝑖 ) denotes the category of item 𝑖 , and I𝑢,𝑑 denotes the set of items that user 𝑢 has interacted with in domain 𝑑 . We then Multi-TAP: Multi-criteria Target Adaptive Persona Modeling for Cross-Domain Recommendation 

discretize 𝑥 𝑢,𝑑 into three ordinal levels using tertiles of the empirical distribution over all users in domain 𝑑 :               

> ℓCD
> 𝑢,𝑑 =
> 
> Low ,𝑥 𝑢,𝑑 <𝑄 𝑑 (1/3),
> Middle ,𝑄 𝑑 (1/3) ≤ 𝑥 𝑢,𝑑 <𝑄 𝑑 (2/3),
> High ,𝑥 𝑢,𝑑 ≥𝑄 𝑑 (2/3),
> (5)

where 𝑄 𝑑 (𝑞 ) represents the 𝑞 -th quantile of the empirical distri-bution of {𝑥 𝑢,𝑑 } over users in domain 𝑑 . Intuitively, this criterion distinguishes users with narrow category focus from those with broad category exploration within the same domain. 

Category familiarity complements category diversity by mea-suring the depth of a user’s interactions with a specific category, relative to other users. Since interaction frequencies vary signif-icantly across categories, we normalize users’ interaction counts in a category-aware manner. Specifically, for each category 𝑐 , we define category-specific familiarity thresholds 𝑄 𝑐 (𝑞 ) based on the distribution of user-category interaction counts:                 

> 𝑄 𝑐 (𝑞 )=Quantile 𝑞
>   | E 𝑢,𝑐 |:𝑢 ∈ U 𝑐
> ,𝑞 ∈13,23,(6)

where |E 𝑢,𝑐 | denotes the number of interactions of user 𝑢 within items in category 𝑐 , and U𝑐 denotes the set of users who have interacted with items in category 𝑐 . We then define the category familiarity labels ℓCF  

> 𝑢,𝑐

for user 𝑢 and category 𝑐 based on the category-specific tertile thresholds as follows:                 

> ℓCF
> 𝑢,𝑐 =
> 
> Low ,| E 𝑢,𝑐 |<𝑄 𝑐 (1/3),
> Middle ,𝑄 𝑐 (1/3) ≤ | E 𝑢,𝑐 |<𝑄 𝑐 (2/3),
> High ,| E 𝑢,𝑐 | ≥ 𝑄 𝑐 (2/3).
> (7)

Intuitively, this criterion captures how deeply a user engages with a category compared to other users consuming the same category. The user persona database D𝑢,𝑑 for 𝑢 in 𝑑 is formally defined as: 

D𝑢,𝑑 =



{ℓ (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑢,𝑐

}𝑘 ∈ { PS ,QP ,PB ,CF }, 𝑐 ∈ C 𝑑 , ℓ CD 

> 𝑢,𝑑



, (8) where C𝑑 denotes the set of item categories in domain 𝑑 . That is, 

D𝑢,𝑑 represents a category-indexed collection of criterion-specific preference signals that explicitly decomposes a user’s consumption behavior within domain 𝑑 .

Step 2: Persona Construction with LLM Assistance. In this step, we use an LLM as a controlled auxiliary module to convert struc-tured preference signals into natural-language persona descriptions. Importantly, the LLM is only used at this step to verbalize explicitly provided evidence, rather than to infer or predict user preferences. Prior studies have shown that long and unstructured inputs ( e.g. ,raw item descriptions or feature lists) can degrade LLM reasoning performance and increase hallucination risks [8, 13, 19, 20]. Motivated by these findings, we adopt a structured prompt design that strictly constrains the LLM’s generation space. Specifically, the LLM input consists of three components: (1) a concise domain description T desc  

> 𝑑

that specifies domain-specific item semantics, (2) a small set of representative textual metadata 𝑚 𝑖,𝑑 (i.e. , item title and category) associated with items in the user’s interaction history, and (3) the user persona database D𝑢,𝑑 , which provides explicit, criterion-specific preference signals at the category level. In addition, we provide a fixed criterion-aware instruction prompt, denoted as Psona , which specifies the semantic meaning of each preference criterion and guides the LLM to generate aligned persona descriptions, preventing semantic drift across criteria. Given this structured input, our objective is not to generate a single holistic user profile, but to obtain separate persona de-scriptions corresponding to each preference criterion. Formally, let 

K = {PS , QP , PB , CD , CF } denote the set of preference criteria. Us-ing a fixed system prompt, the LLM generates all criterion-specific persona descriptions {𝑓 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑢

}𝑘 ∈ K for each user 𝑢 in a single genera-tion pass, from which each description is obtained as:            

> 𝑓 (𝑘 )
> 𝑢 =
> h
> LLM
> 
> Tdesc
> 𝑑 ∥𝑚 𝑖,𝑑 ∥
> h
> Psona ∥D(𝑘 )
> 𝑢,𝑑
> i i
> 𝑘 ,(9)

where LLM (·) denotes an LLM used for persona generation, and we instantiate it as gpt-4o in all experiments. The complete prompt template is provided in Appendix A.2 .

Step 3: Persona Encoding and Aggregation. We encode the criterion-specific persona descriptions into dense vector represen-tations and aggregate them into a unified user embedding. For each preference criterion 𝑘 , the corresponding persona description is en-coded by the LLM text encoder, specifically text-embedding-3-large ,into a 𝑛 -dimensional embedding e(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑢

∈ R𝑛 , yielding a set of decom-posed persona embeddings E𝑢 = {e(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑢

| 𝑘 ∈ K} . Using the same LLM family for encoding ensures semantic consistency between the generated persona descriptions and their vector representations. To aggregate heterogeneous persona signal into a single user representation, we adopt a self-attention-based mechanism [ 14 , 16 ,38 , 42 ]. Specifically, a randomly initialized and learnable mask token 

eMASK  

> 𝑢

is used as the aggregation query, while persona embeddings act as keys and values. For each user 𝑢 and domain 𝑑 , the attention weight 𝛼 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑢

for criterion 𝑘 is computed as follows:              

> 𝛼 (𝑘 )
> 𝑢 =
> exp
> 
> (eMASK
> 𝑢 ·e(𝑘 )
> 𝑢 )/ √𝑛
> Í𝑘 ′ ∈K exp
> 
> (eMASK
> 𝑢 ·e(𝑘 ′ )
> 𝑢 )/ √𝑛
> ,(10)

where · denotes the dot product and √𝑛 is the scaling factor. Using the resulting attention weights, persona embeddings are aggregated and transformed to obtain the final user embedding h𝑢 as follows:          

> h𝑢 =Proj FFN  ∑︁
> 𝑘 ∈K
> 𝛼 (𝑘 )
> 𝑢 e(𝑘 )
> 𝑢
> !!
> .(11)

The resulting embedding h𝑢 serves as the corresponding domain persona embedding of user 𝑢 for downstream recommendation. Accordingly, we denote the persona-aware embeddings of user 𝑢 

in the source and target domains as h𝑢 𝑠 and h𝑢 𝑡 , respectively. 

## 3.3 Target-adaptive Doppelganger Transfer 

The goal of (P2) is to perform target-adaptive knowledge transfer by leveraging the persona-aware user representations generated in (P1). While contrastive learning has been widely used in CDR to align overlapping users across domains [ 10 , 36 , 41 , 43 ], direct source-target alignment can compress domain-specific preferences and distort target-domain representations. To address this limi-tation, we design a target-centered transfer mechanism that is trained exclusively on the target domain. Specifically, we intro-duce a doppelganger-based transfer framework, where each target-domain persona embedding serves as the anchor. The anchor se-lectively absorbs transferable information from its source-domain counterpart through a target-conditioned intermediate representa-tion, rather than enforcing direct source-target embedding collapse. 

Step 1: Doppelganger Generation. We construct a doppelganger embedding for each user 𝑢 𝑡 ∈ U 𝑡 as an intermediate representa-tion for cross-domain transfer. Given the target persona embedding 

h𝑢 𝑡 obtained in (P1), we initialize the doppelganger embedding ˜h𝑢 𝑡 Daehee Kang and Yeon-Chang Lee 

as a direct copy of h𝑢 𝑡 , ensuring a target-centered starting point that preserves target-domain preference characteristics. To selectively incorporate transferable information from the source domain 𝑑 𝑠 , we refine ˜h𝑢 𝑡 via a cross-attention operation between the target and source persona embeddings of the same user. Specifically, the initial target embedding ˜h𝑢 𝑡 serves as the query, while the corresponding source persona embedding h𝑢 𝑠 acts as the key and value. The resulting cross-attention weight 𝛼 dpl  

> 𝑢

and the refined doppelganger embedding ˜h𝑢 𝑡 are computed as follows:                   

> 𝛼 dpl
> 𝑢,𝑠 =
> exp
> 
> (˜h𝑢𝑡 ·h𝑢𝑠 )/ √𝑛
> Í𝑢 ′
> 𝑠 ∈U 𝑠 exp
> 
> (˜h𝑢𝑡 ·h𝑢 ′
> 𝑠 )/ √𝑛
> ,˜h𝑢𝑡 =∑︁
> 𝑢𝑠 ∈U 𝑠
> 𝛼 dpl
> 𝑢,𝑠 h𝑢𝑠 ,(12)

where ˜h𝑢 𝑡 in the attention score denotes the initial target persona embedding before aggregation. This design allows the doppelganger persona to selectively absorb source-domain signals in a target. 

Step 2: Doppelganger-based Knowledge Transfer. In this step, we perform knowledge transfer by aligning each target persona embedding h𝑢 𝑡 with its corresponding doppelganger embedding 

˜h𝑢 𝑡 . Specifically, we encourage h𝑢 𝑡 to be close to ˜h𝑢 𝑡 , while pushing it away from the doppelgangers ˜h𝑢 ′ 

> 𝑡

of other users using an InfoNCE-based contrastive objective [6, 43]:             

> Ldpl =−∑︁
> 𝑢 ∈U 𝑜
> log exp
> 
> sim (h𝑢𝑡 ,˜h𝑢𝑡 )/ 𝜏
> Í𝑢 ′ ∈U 𝑜 exp
> 
> sim (h𝑢𝑡 ,˜h𝑢 ′
> 𝑡 )/ 𝜏
> ,(13)

where sim (· , ·) denotes cosine similarity and 𝜏 is a temperature hyperparameter. As a result, transferable source-domain signals are incorporated indirectly, without enforcing direct source–target em-bedding alignment . Importantly, this contrastive objective is defined on the target domain and optimized jointly with the recommenda-tion loss described in the next section. 

## 3.4 Training Process 

In recommendation tasks, semantic persona embeddings alone are insufficient to capture collaborative signals from user-item interac-tions. We therefore complement persona embeddings with ID-based behavioral embeddings and jointly optimize them under the rec-ommendation objective. In the following, we describe the training process of Multi-TAP from the perspective of the target domain, which constitutes the main optimization stage of our framework. 

Target-domain Recommendation Training. For the target do-main 𝑑 𝑡 , we construct the final representation by combining the target persona embedding with collaborative behavioral signals. Specifically, we independently pretrain a LightGCN [ 11 ] on the target-domain user-item interaction graph to obtain ID-based user and item embeddings v𝑢 𝑡 and v𝑖 𝑡 , which serve as complementary behavioral backbone features. The final user and item representa-tions are then constructed as follows:               

> z𝑢𝑡 =MLP  [h𝑢𝑡 ∥v𝑢𝑡 ],z𝑖𝑡 =MLP  [h𝑖𝑡 ∥v𝑖𝑡 ],(14)

where h𝑖 𝑡 denotes the semantic embedding of item 𝑖 𝑡 , encoded from its textual metadata ( i.e. , T 𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑐 𝑑 and item category) using the same text encoder as in (P1), and MLP denotes a single-layer feed-forward network. This design enables Multi-TAP to incorporate persona semantics into standard ID-based recommendation architectures. Finally, the recommendation objective on the target domain 𝑑 𝑡 

is defined using the Bayesian Personalized Ranking (BPR) [ 28 ] loss: 

Table 2: Dataset statistics for three Amazon domain pairs Domain |U 𝑜 | |I 𝑑 | # Interactions Train Valid Test                                  

> Elec 7,274 58,461 180,521 141,868 17,695 20,958 Home 59,668 171,902 126,234 21,123 24,545 Sports 4,588 34,694 94,422 69,549 11,390 13,483 Cloth 45,522 113,708 82,444 14,553 16,711 Home 5,798 60,976 162,480 120,438 19,654 22,388 Toys 35,358 125,074 90,857 15,796 18,421

L𝑡  

> rec

= −∑︁  

> 𝑢 ∈ U 𝑡

∑︁ (𝑖,𝑖 ′ ) ∈ I 𝑢,𝑡 

log 𝜎 



ˆ𝑦 𝑑 𝑡  

> 𝑢,𝑖

− ˆ𝑦 𝑑 𝑡 

> 𝑢,𝑖 ′



+ ∥ Θ∥2, (15) where 𝜎 (·) denotes the sigmoid function, Θ represents model pa-rameters subject to weight decay, and (𝑖, 𝑖 ′) denotes a training pair for user 𝑢 , consisting of a positive item 𝑖 and a sampled negative item 𝑖 ′ from the target domain. The preference score ˆ𝑦 𝑑 𝑡  

> 𝑢,𝑖

= z𝑢 𝑡 · z𝑖 𝑡 

is computed via inner-product matching. 

Joint Optimization with Target-adaptive Transfer. To enable target-adaptive knowledge transfer, we further incorporate the doppelganger-based contrastive objective introduced in Section 3.3. The overall training objective on 𝑑 𝑡 is jointly optimized as follows:       

> L𝑡
> total =L𝑡
> rec +𝜆 · L dpl ,(16)

where 𝜆 controls the contribution of the doppelganger-based In-foNCE loss. By jointly optimizing the recommendation and con-trastive objectives, Multi-TAP effectively leverages collaborative su-pervision while selectively integrating transferable source-domain signals in a target-centered manner. 

Source-domain Training as a Prerequisite. Finally, we note that the recommendation objective on the source domain 𝑑 𝑠 is optimized independently as a prerequisite for knowledge transfer. Specifically, the same BPR objectives defined in Eq. (15) is applied to the source domain, with domain-specific inputs and indices ( i.e. , 𝑑 𝑡 replaced by 𝑑 𝑠 ). This step provides source persona embeddings h𝑢 𝑠 and h𝑖 𝑠 

obtained via (P1), and behavioral embeddings v𝑢 𝑠 and v𝑖 𝑠 obtained via LightGCN. However, these embeddings do not participate in the joint optimization on the target domain. In practice, source-domain training can be performed once a domain pair is determined, or reused from a pretrained model when available. 

## 4 Evaluation 

To evaluate effectiveness of Multi-TAP , we designed our experi-ments to answer the following evaluation questions (EQs): 

• (EQ1) : Does Multi-TAP consistently outperform state-of-the-art CDR methods on real-world benchmarks? 

• (EQ2) : Does domain-specific persona modeling effectively cap-ture fine-grained user preferences for CDR? 

• (EQ3) : Does doppelganger-based knowledge transfer provide more reliable cross-domain knowledge transfer? 

• (EQ4) : How sensitive is the accuracy of Multi-TAP to variations in the hyper-parameters 𝜆 and 𝜏 ?

• (EQ5) : Is Multi-TAP computationally efficient in practice? 

## 4.1 Experimental Setup 

Datasets. We evaluate Multi-TAP on five domains from the widely used Amazon review dataset [ 12 ], including Electronics, Home, Multi-TAP: Multi-criteria Target Adaptive Persona Modeling for Cross-Domain Recommendation 

Table 3: Performance comparison (%) of Multi-TAP on six cross-domain recommendation tasks from the Amazon dataset. Results on additional domain pairs and metrics are provided in Appendix. We note that some results differ from those reported in prior work due to the time-aware data split, while all baselines are verified to be reproducible under their original settings. Domain Metrics (@5) Single-Domain Methods Cross-Domain Methods Multi-TAP                                                                                                                                         

> (Source →Target) BPRMF NGCF LightGCN UniCDR CDIMF CUT-LightGCN PPA DGCDR Elec →Home HR 1.69 ±0.10 1.66 ±0.13 1.77 ±0.10 1.69 ±0.03 1.94 ±0.06 1.96 ±0.08 3.06 ±0.04 2.63 ±0.12 3.23 ±0.19
> NDCG 0.49 ±0.03 0.49 ±0.04 0.51 ±0.02 0.54 ±0.01 0.57 ±0.02 0.58 ±0.03 0.89 ±0.01 0.76 ±0.03 0.91 ±0.03
> Home →Elec HR 1.66 ±0.15 1.48 ±0.08 2.21 ±0.10 1.55 ±0.08 1.64 ±0.06 1.57 ±0.05 1.79 ±0.01 1.57 ±0.08 2.44 ±0.38
> NDCG 0.47 ±0.02 0.42 ±0.02 0.63 ±0.03 0.47 ±0.02 0.46 ±0.01 0.46 ±0.01 0.54 ±0.01 0.47 ±0.02 0.77 ±0.15
> Sports →Cloth HR 1.56 ±0.36 1.51 ±0.23 1.66 ±0.14 1.71 ±0.23 2.21 ±0.05 2.96 ±0.18 3.36 ±0.05 2.25 ±0.17 4.09 ±0.58
> NDCG 0.42 ±0.07 0.42 ±0.07 0.46 ±0.02 0.47 ±0.06 0.68 ±0.01 0.92 ±0.08 0.98 ±0.01 0.63 ±0.04 1.11 ±0.31
> Cloth →Sports HR 1.59 ±0.20 1.82 ±0.12 2.20 ±0.14 1.37 ±0.10 1.37 ±0.05 1.67 ±0.06 2.25 ±0.04 1.85 ±0.05 2.08 ±0.19 NDCG 0.50 ±0.06 0.56 ±0.03 0.72 ±0.04 0.42 ±0.05 0.39 ±0.02 0.51 ±0.01 0.71 ±0.01 0.58 ±0.01 0.68 ±0.10 Home →Toys HR 0.95 ±0.11 0.84 ±0.09 0.96 ±0.11 0.91 ±0.07 1.31 ±0.01 1.23 ±0.08 1.35 ±0.05 1.19 ±0.04 1.56 ±0.24
> NDCG 0.27 ±0.01 0.23 ±0.03 0.25 ±0.02 0.27 ±0.02 0.41 ±0.00 0.37 ±0.02 0.36 ±0.02 0.30 ±0.01 0.47 ±0.03
> Toys →Home HR 1.44 ±0.28 0.88 ±0.14 1.75 ±0.11 1.85 ±0.14 1.55 ±0.02 2.13 ±0.08 2.98 ±0.04 2.73 ±0.06 3.11 ±0.15
> NDCG 0.40 ±0.07 0.23 ±0.04 0.47 ±0.04 0.51 ±0.04 0.43 ±0.00 0.58 ±0.03 0.80 ±0.01 0.73 ±0.02 0.88 ±0.03

Table 4: Effect of persona decomposition with processed metadata, where Multi (Proc.) denotes our strategy Domain Metrics (@5) Single (Raw) Single (Proc.) Multi (Proc.)                   

> Sports →Cloth HR 3.70 3.77 4.09
> NDCG 1.08 1.09 1.11
> Cloth →Sports HR 1.83 1.99 2.08
> NDCG 0.61 0.64 0.68

Sports, Cloth, and Toys. All datasets are publicly available. 1 We conduct experiments on all possible cross-domain pairs, resulting in ten domain transfer settings. In this section, we focus on three com-monly used domain pairs with the largest numbers of overlapping users. Table 2 reports statistics for the three domain pairs. The Amazon dataset covers user interactions from 1996 to 2023. Unlike random-sampling-based protocols adopted in prior work [ 3 , 5 , 15 , 40 ], we employ a time-aware data split for temporal con-sistency [ 18 ]. Specifically, interactions before 2019 are used as the training set, while interactions after 2019 are split into validation and test sets, considering only users observed in both periods. 

Evaluation Tasks. Following prior CDR studies [ 14 , 23 , 24 ], we adopt a full ranking evaluation protocol, where all unobserved items are treated as candidates for each user. We evaluate performance using standard top-𝐾 metrics, including hit ratio (HR) and normal-ized discounted cumulative gain (NDCG). All results are averaged over five independent runs with different random seeds. 

Competitors. We compare Multi-TAP with eight baselines under two settings: single-domain recommendation methods, including BPRMF [ 28 ], NGCF [ 34 ], and LightGCN [ 11 ], and cross-domain recommendation methods, including UniCDR [ 3 ], CDIMF [ 30 ], CUT [ 24 ], PPA [ 40 ], and DGCDR [ 35 ]. Detailed descriptions of the CDR baselines are provided in Section 5. For evaluation, we use implementations from the widely adopted open-source library QRec 2, and resort to author-released code when unavailable. 

Implementation details. All experiments are conducted using PyTorch on NVIDIA RTX 6000 Ada GPUs. Following [ 23 , 26 , 36 ], we use the Adam optimizer [ 17 ] and train models for up to 100 epochs with early stopping. The embedding dimension for users and items is set to 128, and all hyperparameters are tuned on the validation 

> 1https://amazon-reviews-2023.github.io/.
> 2https://github.com/Coder-Yu/QRec.

Table 5: Effect of self-attentive aggregation for decomposed personas, where Self-Attn denotes our strategy Domain Metrics (@5) Mean Concat Self-Attn                   

> Sports →Cloth HR 3.66 3.99 4.09
> NDCG 1.10 1.04 1.11
> Cloth →Sports HR 1.93 2.01 2.08
> NDCG 0.60 0.65 0.68

set. For persona construction in Multi-TAP , we use gpt-4o with each user’s most recent 30 interactions, resulting in an average per-user cost of approximately $0.022. For reproducibility, complete implementation details, including hyper-parameter search ranges and LLM-related configurations, are provided in Appendix A.1 .

## 4.2 Results and Analysis 

Due to space limitations, we report results for three representative domain pairs using top-5 metrics, and provide complete results on other domain pairs and metrics in Appendix B .

(EQ1) Overall Performance Comparison. Table 3 reports the overall performance of Multi-TAP compared with eight baselines. 

Bold and underlined values indicate the best and second-best re-sults, respectively. As shown in Table 3, Multi-TAP achieves the best performance in 5 out of 6 bidirectional CDR tasks, demonstrating consistent superiority across most transfer settings. Specifically, on the (Home →Elec) task, Multi-TAP outperforms the best competitor (i.e. , PPA) by up to 36.3%, and 42.6% in terms of HR@5 and NDCG@5, respectively. The only exception occurs in the (Cloth →Sports) task, where Multi-TAP ranks second-best; however, it significantly out-performs the same baseline ( i.e. , PPA) in the reverse direction. Over-all, these results demonstrate that explicitly modeling intra-domain heterogeneity through multi-persona representations is crucial for achieving robust and consistent CDR performance. 

(EQ2) Effectiveness of Persona Modeling. To examine the ef-fectiveness of persona modeling, we evaluate two aspects: persona decomposition with processed metadata ( EQ2-1 ) and context-aware aggregation of decomposed personas ( EQ2-2 ). For (EQ2-1), Table 4 compares three settings: a single -persona model using raw item-level metadata (Single (Raw)), a single -persona model using processed metadata (Single (Proc.)), and our proposed 

multi -persona model using the same processed metadata (Multi Daehee Kang and Yeon-Chang Lee                

> 0
> 0.02
> 0.04
> HR@5
> Elec Home
> →Home →Elec
> Sports Cloth
> →Cloth →Sports
> Home Toys
> →Toys →Home
> Direct-ID Direct-Persona Direct-Both Multi-TAP

Figure 4: Effect of doppelganger-based indirect transfer com-pared to direct alignment strategies in terms of HR@5. 

(Proc.)). Here, raw metadata provides criterion-specific values di-rectly for each preference dimension, whereas processed metadata encodes their relative ordinal levels, denoted as 𝑙 PS , 𝑙 QP , 𝑙 PB , 𝑙 CF ,and 𝑙 CD . The prompts used for persona generation in each setting are provided in Appendix A.3 . We make two key observations from Table 4. First, replacing raw item-level metadata with pro-cessed metadata consistently improves performance, indicating that relative ordinal preference signals provide more informative super-vision than absolute criterion values. Second, even under the same processed metadata, multi-persona decomposition yields additional gains over single-persona modeling, demonstrating the importance of explicitly modeling intra-domain heterogeneity. For (EQ2-2), Table 5 compares different aggregation strategies for integrating decomposed personas. Specifically, we consider two simple baselines, Mean and Concat , which aggregate persona representations via uniform averaging and feature concatenation, respectively. We compare them against Self-Attn , our proposed self-attentive aggregation module, which adaptively weights personas conditioned on the user and the target domain. As shown in Table 5, 

Self-Attn consistently outperforms Mean and Concat , indicating that self-attentive weighting is crucial for effectively integrating decomposed user personas. 

(EQ3) Effectiveness of Doppelganger Transfer. We evaluate the effectiveness of our target-adaptive doppelganger transfer by comparing it with direct InfoNCE-based alignment strategies, in-cluding (1) Direct-ID , which aligns ID-based user embeddings v𝑢 𝑠 

and v𝑢 𝑡 from LightGCN, (2) Direct-Persona , which aligns persona embeddings h𝑢 𝑠 and h𝑢 𝑡 , and (3) Direct-Both , which aligns their concatenation. All variants share the same backbone as Multi-TAP 

and differ only in the transfer mechanism. As shown in Figure 4, 

Multi-TAP consistently outperforms all direct alignment baselines, while direct alignment exhibits unstable performance across trans-fer directions. This indicates that enforcing direct representation alignment can be sensitive to domain characteristics and may sup-press domain-specific preference signals. 

(EQ4) Hyperparameter Sensitivity. We examine the sensitiv-ity of Multi-TAP to two hyperparameters: the weight 𝜆 of the doppelganger-based transfer loss and the temperature 𝜏 . Figure 5 illustrates the performance trends. For 𝜆 , non-trivial values consis-tently improves performance, with larger values ( e.g. , > 1) achiev-ing clear gains over small ones, highlighting the importance of semantic knowledge transfer beyond behavioral learning. For 𝜏 ,performance is stable across domain pairs, with optimal results typ-ically observed in the range of [0.4, 0.6], indicating that a moderate temperature is sufficient for stable doppelganger-based alignment.                        

> 00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.82
> 0
> 0.01
> 0.02
> 0.03
> 0.04
> 𝜆
> HR@5
> 0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91
> 0
> 0.01
> 0.02
> 0.03
> 0.04
> 𝜏
> Elec →Home Sports →Cloth Home →Toys
> Home →Elec Cloth →Sports Toys →Home

Figure 5: Sensitivity of Multi-TAP to the hyperparameters 𝝀 

and 𝝉 in terms of HR@5. (EQ5) Computational Efficiency. We examine the computational efficiency of Multi-TAP by measuring its training cost. Under the configurations used in our experiments, Multi-TAP can be trained within 9–30 minutes across different domain pairs. This efficiency stems from building on the backbone embeddings learned by Light-GCN and introducing only lightweight persona aggregation and contrastive components. Persona generation incurs an average cost of about 3 seconds per user and is performed offline, ensuring that the overall training pipeline remains scalable. 

## 5 Related Work 

Early CDR work [ 2, 15 , 44 , 45 ] focuses on representation alignment 

using overlapping users, where mapping functions project source-domain user embeddings into the target space, as in EMCDR [ 2 ] and CDIMF [ 30 ]. Subsequent studies [ 3 , 4, 22 ] distinguish domain-shared 

and domain-specific preferences via decomposition or contrastive learning, with representative methods including UniCDR [ 3] and EDDA [ 27 ]. More recent studies address negative transfer mitigation 

by filtering irrelevant source-domain signals, such as CUT [ 24 ] and TrineCDR [ 32 ], or by revisiting direct alignment through diffusion-based reconstruction, as in DGCDR [ 35 ]. However, these methods still operate primarily at the domain level and do not explicitly model intra-domain preference heterogeneity. A few CDR studies explore modeling user preferences with mul-tiple latent components [ 25 , 33 , 40 ]. PPA [ 40 ] introduces latent preference prototypes learned solely from interaction data to cap-ture heterogeneous user interests within ID-based representations. However, these prototypes are implicitly inferred, their number is treated as a hyperparameter, and they are not explicitly adapted to the target domain during transfer. Meanwhile, LLM-based ap-proaches, such as LASSO [ 7], construct semantic user profiles and align users across domains at the natural language level. However, these methods often rely on implicit reasoning to compress rich metadata into a single, unstructured user profile , which limits pref-erence controllability and raises concerns about transfer stability. 

## 6 Conclusion 

In this work, we identified that most existing cross-domain recom-mendation methods fail to explicitly capture intra-domain preference heterogeneity , which is crucial for stable and effective knowledge transfer. Motivated by this observation, we proposed Multi-TAP ,a multi-persona CDR framework that models heterogeneous user preferences in a structured manner and performs target-adaptive knowledge transfer via doppelganger alignment. Extensive experi-ments show that Multi-TAP consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods while remaining computationally efficient. Multi-TAP: Multi-criteria Target Adaptive Persona Modeling for Cross-Domain Recommendation 

## References 

[1] Icek Ajzen. 1991. The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 50, 2 (1991). [2] Jiangxia Cao, Shaoshuai Li, Bowen Yu, Xiaobo Guo, Tingwen Liu, and Bin Wang. 2017. Cross-Domain Recommendation: An Embedding and Mapping Approach. In Proceedings of the 26th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence .[3] Jiangxia Cao, Shaoshuai Li, Bowen Yu, Xiaobo Guo, Tingwen Liu, and Bin Wang. 2023. Towards Universal Cross-Domain Recommendation. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM international conference on web search and data mining .[4] Jiangxia Cao, Xixun Lin, Xin Cong, Jing Ya, Tingwen Liu, and Bin Wang. 2022. DisenCDR: Learning Disentangled Representations for Cross-Domain Recom-mendation. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM conference on Recommender systems .[5] Jiangxia Cao, Jiawei Sheng, Xin Cong, Tingwen Liu, and Bin Wang. 2022. Cross-domain recommendation to cold-start users via variational information bottle-neck. In Proceedings of the IEEE 38th International Conference on data engineering (ICDE) .[6] Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2020. A Simple Framework for Contrastive Learning of Visual Representations. In 

Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning .[7] Yue Chen, Susen Yang, Tong Zhang, Chao Wang, Mingyue Cheng, Chenyi Lei, and Han Li. 2025. Lasso: Large Language Model-based User Simulator for Cross-Domain Recommendation. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Recom-mender Systems .[8] Manuel Cossio. 2025. A comprehensive taxonomy of hallucinations in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.01781 (2025). [9] Jing Du, Zesheng Ye, Bin Guo, Zhiwen Yu, and Lina Yao. 2023. Distributional Domain-Invariant Preference Matching for Cross-Domain Recommendation. In 

Proceedings of the 23rd IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM) .[10] Bowen Hao, Chaoqun Yang, Lei Guo, Junliang Yu, and Hongzhi Yin. 2024. Motif-based prompt learning for universal cross-domain recommendation. In Proceed-ings of the 17th ACM international conference on web search and data mining .[11] Xiangnan He, Kuan Deng, Xiang Wang, Yan Li, Yongdong Zhang, and Meng Wang. 2020. Lightgcn: Simplifying and powering graph convolution network for recommendation. In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in Information Retrieval .[12] Yupeng Hou, Jiacheng Li, Zhankui He, An Yan, Xiusi Chen, and Julian McAuley. 2024. Bridging Language and Items for Retrieval and Recommendation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03952 (2024). [13] Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong, Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong Chen, Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, et al . 2025. A survey on hallucination in large language models: Principles, taxonomy, chal-lenges, and open questions. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 43, 2 (2025). [14] Hyunjun Ju, SeongKu Kang, Dongha Lee, Junyoung Hwang, Sanghwan Jang, and Hwanjo Yu. 2024. Multi-domain recommendation to attract users via domain preference modeling. In Proceedings of the 38th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence .[15] SeongKu Kang, Junyoung Hwang, Dongha Lee, and Hwanjo Yu. 2019. Semi-Supervised Learning for Cross-Domain Recommendation to Cold-Start Users. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management .[16] Wang-Cheng Kang and Julian McAuley. 2018. Self-Attentive Sequential Rec-ommendation. In Proceedings of the 18th IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM) .[17] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Opti-mization. arxiv preprint arXiv.1412.6980 (2014). [18] Yeon-Chang Lee, JaeHyun Lee, Michiharu Yamashita, Dongwon Lee, and Sang-Wook Kim. 2025. Caper: Enhancing career trajectory prediction using tempo-ral knowledge graph and ternary relationship. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining .[19] Roman Levin, Valeriia Cherepanova, Abhimanyu Hans, Avi Schwarzschild, and Tom Goldstein. 2025. Has My System Prompt Been Used? Large Language Model Prompt Membership Inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.09974 (2025). [20] Mosh Levy, Alon Jacoby, and Yoav Goldberg. 2024. Same task, more tokens: the impact of input length on the reasoning performance of large language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14848 (2024). [21] Bin Li, Qiang Yang, and Xiangyang Xue. 2009. Can movies and books collaborate? cross-domain collaborative filtering for sparsity reduction.. In Proceedings of the 21th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence .[22] Chenglin Li, Yuanzhen Xie, Chenyun Yu, Bo Hu, Zang Li, Guoqiang Shu, Xiaohu Qie, and Di Niu. 2023. One for All, All for One: Learning and Transferring User Embeddings for Cross-Domain Recommendation. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM international conference on web search and data mining .[23] Hanyu Li, Jiayu Li, Weizhi Ma, Peijie Sun, Haiyang Wu, Jingwen Wang, Yuekui Yang, Min Zhang, and Shaoping Ma. 2025. CD-CDR: Conditional Diffusion-based Item Generation for Cross-Domain Recommendation. In Proceedings of the 48th International ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in Information Retrieval .[24] Hanyu Li, Weizhi Ma, Peijie Sun, Jiayu Li, Cunxiang Yin, Yancheng He, Guoqiang Xu, Min Zhang, and Shaoping Ma. 2024. Aiming at the Target: Filter Collabora-tive Information for Cross-Domain Recommendation. In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in Information Retrieval .[25] Hourun Li, Yifan Wang, Zhiping Xiao, Jia Yang, Changling Zhou, Ming Zhang, and Wei Ju. 2025. DisCo: graph-based disentangled contrastive learning for cold-start cross-domain recommendation. In Proceedings of the 39th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence .[26] Meng Liu, Jianjun Li, Guohui Li, and Peng Pan. 2020. Cross Domain Recom-mendation via Bi-directional Transfer Graph Collaborative Filtering Networks. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management .[27] Wentao Ning, Xiao Yan, Weiwen Liu, Reynold Cheng, Rui Zhang, and Bo Tang. 2023. Multi-domain Recommendation with Embedding Disentangling and Do-main Alignment. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management .[28] Steffen Rendle, Christoph Freudenthaler, Zeno Gantner, and Lars Schmidt-Thieme. 2009. BPR: Bayesian personalized ranking from implicit feedback. In 

Proceedings of the 25th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence .[29] Aghiles Salah, Thanh-Binh Tran, and Hady W. Lauw. 2021. Towards Source-Aligned Variational Models for Cross-Domain Recommendation. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM conference on Recommender systems .[30] Abdulaziz Samra, Evgeny Frolov, Alexey Vasilev, Alexander Grigorevskiy, and Anton Vakhrushev. 2024. Cross-domain latent factors sharing via implicit matrix factorization. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on Recommender systems .[31] Ajit P. Singh and Geoffrey J. Gordon. 2008. Relational learning via collective matrix factorization. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining .[32] Zijian Song, Wenhan Zhang, Lifang Deng, Jiandong Zhang, Zhihua Wu, Kaigui Bian, and Bin Cui. 2024. Mitigating negative transfer in cross-domain recom-mendation via knowledge transferability enhancement. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining .[33] Caiqi Sun, Jiewei Gu, BinBin Hu, Xin Dong, Hai Li, Lei Cheng, and Linjian Mo. 2023. REMIT: reinforced multi-interest transfer for cross-domain recommenda-tion. In Proceedings of the 37th AAAI conference on artificial intelligence .[34] Xiang Wang, Xiangnan He, Meng Wang, Fuli Feng, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2019. Neural graph collaborative filtering. In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in Information Retrieval .[35] Yuhan Wang, Qing Xie, Zhifeng Bao, Mengzi Tang, Lin Li, and Yongjian Liu. 2025. Enhancing transferability and consistency in cross-domain recommendations via supervised disentanglement. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems .[36] Wenhao Yang, Yingchun Jian, Yibo Wang, Shiyin Lu, Lei Shen, Bing Wang, Hai-hong Tang, and Lijun Zhang. 2024. Not all embeddings are created equal: towards robust cross-domain recommendation via contrastive learning. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference .[37] Tianzi Zang, Yanmin Zhu, Haobing Liu, Ruohan Zhang, and Jiadi Yu. 2022. A Survey on Cross-domain Recommendation: Taxonomies, Methods, and Future Directions. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 41, 2 (2022). [38] Tingting Zhang, Pengpeng Zhao, Yanchi Liu, Victor S Sheng, Jiajie Xu, Deqing Wang, Guanfeng Liu, Xiaofang Zhou, et al . 2019. Feature-level deeper self-attention network for sequential recommendation.. In Proceedings of the 28th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence .[39] Yu Zhang, Bin Cao, and Dit-Yan Yeung. 2012. Multi-Domain Collaborative Filtering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1203.3535 (2012). [40] Yuxi Zhang, Ji Zhang, Feiyang Xu, Lvying Chen, Bohan Li, Lei Guo, and Hongzhi Yin. 2024. Preference Prototype-Aware Learning for Universal Cross-Domain Recommendation. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management .[41] Chuang Zhao, Hongke Zhao, Ming He, Jian Zhang, and Jianping Fan. 2023. Cross-domain recommendation via user interest alignment. In Proceedings of the ACM Web conference .[42] Yi Zhao, Chaozhuo Li, Jiquan Peng, Xiaohan Fang, Feiran Huang, Senzhang Wang, Xing Xie, and Jibing Gong. 2023. Beyond the overlapping users: Cross-domain recommendation via adaptive anchor link learning. In Proceedings of the 46th International ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in Information Retrieval .[43] Donglin Zhou, Xinbei Cai, and Weike Pan. 2025. Contrastive Text-enhanced Transformer for Cross-Domain Sequential Recommendation. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining .[44] Feng Zhu, Chaochao Chen, Yan Wang, Guanfeng Liu, and Xiaolin Zheng. 2019. DTCDR: A Framework for Dual-Target Cross-Domain Recommendation. In Pro-ceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management .Daehee Kang and Yeon-Chang Lee           

> [45] Feng Zhu, Yan Wang, Chaochao Chen, Guanfeng Liu, and Xiaolin Zheng. 2020. A Graphical and Attentional Framework for Dual-Target Cross-Domain Recom-mendation. In Proceedings of the 29th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence .[46] Feng Zhu, Yan Wang, Chaochao Chen, Jun Zhou, Longfei Li, and Guanfeng Liu. 2021. Cross-domain recommendation: challenges, progress, and prospects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.01696 (2021). [47] Yongchun Zhu, Kaikai Ge, Fuzhen Zhuang, Ruobing Xie, Dongbo Xi, Xu Zhang, Leyu Lin, and Qing He. 2021. Transfer-Meta Framework for Cross-domain Recommendation to Cold-Start Users. In Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in Information Retrieval .[48] Yongchun Zhu, Zhenwei Tang, Yudan Liu, Fuzhen Zhuang, Ruobing Xie, Xu Zhang, Leyu Lin, and Qing He. 2022. Personalized Transfer of User Preferences for Cross-domain Recommendation. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM international conference on web search and data mining .

## A Additional Details of Multi-TAP A.1 Implementation Details 

We fix the batch size to 1024, and tune the dropout rate from {0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7}. The number of negative samples is selected from {1, 3, 5}, and the regularization coefficient is searched over {1e-4, 5e-4, 1e-3, 5e-3}. For LLM-based components, we use gpt-4o 

with the temperature set to 0.7 for persona construction and 1.0 for domain description generation. For semantic encoding, we employ 

text-embedding-3-large , using a 3072-dimensional embedding for user persona generation and a 512-dimensional embedding for item semantic representations. 

## A.2 User Persona Database 

Table 6 presents a portion of the pre-built user persona database, which serves as the structured input for concrete multi-persona construction. 

Table 6: Metadata-based user persona database construction 

> User persona database (e.g., Home)
> [{ "User ID": "AEXXX", "price_affiliated_group": { "Kitchen & Dining": "L", "Vacuums & Floor Care": "L", "Storage & Organization": "H", "Home Décor Products": "M", "rating_score_preferred_group": { "Kitchen & Dining": "M", "Home Décor Products": "H", "Bedding": "M", "Vacuums & Floor Care": "H", "Storage & Organization": "H" }, "rating_nums_preferred_group": { "Kitchen & Dining": "L", "Home Décor Products": "H", "Bedding": "L", "Vacuums & Floor Care": "L", "Storage & Organization": "M"}, "cats_familiarity": { "Bedding": "L", "Home Décor Products": "H", "Kitchen & Dining": "L", "Storage & Organization": "L", "Vacuums & Floor Care": "L" }, "cats_interaction_diversity": "L" }, { "User ID": "AGXXX", "price_affiliated_group": { "Kitchen & Dining": "H", "Vacuums & Floor Care": "L", "Furniture": "H", "Bedding": "L", "Storage & Organization": "H" }, ... } ]

## A.3 LLM-based Generation 

Domain-specific description. We derive a compact domain de-scription using an LLM to summarize domain-specific item char-acteristics. This description serves as a contextual guidance that constrains user persona generation 𝑓 𝑘 𝑢 to the appropriate domain knowledge space. To this end, for each domain 𝑑 , we sample a set of representative items based on interaction frequency and rating scores. Specifically, we select 50 frequently interacted items and 50 highly rated items, resulting in 100 items per domain. Using their associated metadata, we construct domain configuration texts T𝑖,𝑑 

as follows: 

T𝑖,𝑑 = (Domain ∥ Item title ∥ Item category ∥ Item description ),

(17) where ∥ denotes text concatenation. The domain description is then generated as follows: 

T desc  

> 𝑑

= LLM  Pdesc ∥ T 1,𝑑 ∥ · · · ∥ T 100 ,𝑑 

, (18) where Pdesc denotes the system prompt for domain description generation and LLM (·) represents the text generation process of the language model. The system prompt and an example output are provided in Table 7 .

Multi-persona construction prompt. We design system prompts for persona construction under three settings to evaluate the effect of persona decomposition with processed metadata (EQ2-1). 

• Table 8 presents the Single (Raw) setting, which generates a natural-language persona profile directly from raw item-level attributes. 

• Table 9 shows the Single (Proc.) setting, where metadata is first encoded into relative ordinal levels ( e.g. , High, Middle, Low) and then integrated into a single persona description. 

• Table 10 details our proposed prompt Psona . Using the same processed metadata with as in Single (Proc.), Multi-TAP explic-itly decomposes user preferences into five distinct persona descriptions corresponding to price sensitivity, quality prefer-ence, popularity bias, category familiarity, and category diversity, enabling more effective modeling of intra-domain heterogeneity .

## B Additional Analysis and Results 

Following our main findings, we present additional analyses to further validate the effectiveness of Multi-TAP .

Complete performance comparison. Table 11 reports complete performance results for the remaining cross-domain pairs in the Amazon dataset. Across diverse transfer scenarios, Multi-TAP con-sistently outperforms state-of-the-art baselines, demonstrating the robustness of our multi-persona decomposition and doppelganger-based transfer strategy. 

Intra-domain preference heterogeneity analysis. Figure 6 ex-tends our analysis of intra-domain heterogeneity across multiple. Specifically, it reports price- and rating-based preservation in the Home domain (Figure 6-(a) and -(c)), rating-based preservation in the Cloth domain (Figure 6-(b)), and popularity-based preserva-tion in the Toys domain (Figure 6-(d)). The heatmaps visualizes the conditional preference preservation ratio, which measures how Multi-TAP: Multi-criteria Target Adaptive Persona Modeling for Cross-Domain Recommendation 

consistently users retain their dominant preference labels when transitioning between base and compared categories within the same domain. 

Table 7: System prompt for domain description generation 

Component Content Task Description You are an e-commerce platform analyst that generates a concise and gen-eral domain description using only the provided item metadata samples. The generated description is used to condition subsequent LLM-based user persona construction. 

Input Format { "Domain": "<Domain Name>", "sampled_item_list": { "item_id": "<title || category || description>" } } 

Generation Rules Write a **Domain Description** that summarizes the overall characteris-tics of the domain in 2–3 sentences. 

Output Format { "Domain": "<Domain Name>", "Domain Profile": { "Domain Description": "..." } } 

Example Result { "Domain": "Electronics", "Domain Profile": { "Domain Description": "The Electronics domain encompasses a wide range of gadgets and devices designed for personal, professional, and entertainment purposes. It includes innovative technologies like memory cards, wireless headphones, portable projectors, computing accessories, power solutions, and GPS devices. This domain focuses on functionality, connectivity, durability, and modernized design to meet the needs of technologically savvy consumers."} } 

Table 8: System prompt for single-persona generation using raw item-level metadata (Single (Raw)) 

Component Content Task Description You are an e-commerce user analysis expert. Analyze the provided con-text (Domain, User ID, and History) to generate ONE natural-language persona profile. The persona must jointly reflect: 1. Price sensitivity, 2. Quality preference, 3. Popularity bias, 4. Category familiarity, 5. Category diversity. 

Input Format { "Domain": "<domain_name>", "User ID": "<user_id>", "History": [ { "item_id": "<parent_asin>", "title": "<item_title>", "category": "<item_category>", "average_rating": <rating>, "rating_number": <number>, "user_rating": <score>, "price": <price> } ] } 

Generation Rules • Produce ONE USER PERSONA in 3–4 sentences (at least 3). 

• The persona must integrate signals from: 

• Price-centric: Describe user’s price sensitivity and the features of liked items. 

• Quality/Score-centric: Describe user’s rating-related attitude, citing liked item traits. 

• Category preference: Describe user’s item categories preference, cit-ing real interacted categories name and familiarity. 

• Category diversity: Describe interaction diversity and category ex-ploration, citing real interaction history. 

Output Format { "User ID": "<user_id>", "Profiles": { "<integrated persona>": "..." } } 

Example Result { "User ID": "<AXXXX>", "Profiles": { "integrated persona": "This user enjoys high-quality items, often rating them highly, especially in Women’s and Men’s clothing categories. They show a strong preference for popular, well-rated items, such as the Men’s T-Shirt Pack and Levi’s jeans. Price sensitivity varies; they don’t mind spending more for quality, as seen with the crossbody bag. Their shopping spans both popular and niche items with a focus on Women’s clothing, showing a moderate category diversity."} } 

Table 9: System prompt for single-persona generation using processed metadata (Single (Proc.)) 

Component Content Task Description You are an e-commerce user analysis expert. Analyze the provided con-text (Domain, User ID, USER SPECIFIC INPUTS, and History) to generate ONE natural-language persona profile. The persona must jointly reflect: 1. Price sensitivity, 2. Quality preference, 3. Popularity bias, 4. Category familiarity, 5. Category diversity. 

Input Format { "Domain": "<domain_name>", "Domain description": "<domain_desc>", "User ID": "<user_id>", "category_price_level": {"catA": "H|M|L"}, {"catB": "H|M|L"},...,{"catX": "H|M|L"} "category_rating_level": {"catA": "H|M|L"}, {"catB": "H|M|L"},...,{"catX": "H|M|L"} "category_popularity_level": {"catA": "H|M|L"}, {"catB": "H|M|L"},...,{"catX": "H|M|L"} "category_familiarity_level": {"catA": "H|M|L"}, {"catB": "H|M|L"},...,{"catX": "H|M|L"} "overall_category_diversity": "H|M|L", "History": [ { "item_id": "...", "title": "...", "category": "...", "average_rating": n, "rating_number": n, "user_rating": n, "cat_item_price_tag": "H|M|L" } ] } 

Generation Rules • Produce ONE USER PERSONA in 3–4 sentences (at least 3). 

• Use USER SPECIFIC INPUTS then history. 

• Map levels to language: H=High, M=Middle, L=Low signal in <cate-gory>. <NOTIONS of USER SPECIFIC INPUTS> 

• category_price : Price class by category of items interacted with. 

• category_rating : Average rating level of items within each category. 

• category_popularity : Item popularity (review count) per category. 

• category_familiarity : Interaction frequency within each category. 

• category_diversity : Number of different categories explored overall. 

Output Format { "User ID": "<user_id>", "Profiles": { "<integrated persona>": "..." } } 

Example Result { "User ID": "<AXXXX>", "Profiles": { "integrated persona": "This user tends to prefer higher prices in Women and Luggage & Travel Gear categories, reflecting a taste for premium items. The user shows moderate quality sensitivity in Women, but high in Men, indicating a focus on well-rated men’s items. The user enjoys popular items in Women and Men, suggesting apreference for mainstream choices. A high familiarity with Women and Novelty & More categories highlights a strong interest in these areas. The user exhibits moderate category diversity, exploring a range of clothing and accessory options."} } Daehee Kang and Yeon-Chang Lee 

Table 10: System prompt for multi-persona generation with preference decomposition ( Multi-TAP , ours). 

Component Content Task Description You are an e-commerce user analysis expert. Analyze the provided con-text (Domain, User ID, USER SPECIFIC INPUTS, and History) to generate FIVE natural-language personas, each focusing on: 1. Price sensitivity, 2. Quality preference, 3. Popularity bias, 4. Category familiarity, 5. Category diversity. 

Input Format { "Domain": "<domain_name>", "Domain description": "<domain_desc>", "User ID": "<user_id>", "category_price_level": {"catA": "H|M|L"}, {"catB": "H|M|L"},...,{"catX": "H|M|L"} "category_rating_level": {"catA": "H|M|L"}, {"catB": "H|M|L"},...,{"catX": "H|M|L"} "category_popularity_level": {"catA": "H|M|L"}, {"catB": "H|M|L"},...,{"catX": "H|M|L"} "category_familiarity_level": {"catA": "H|M|L"}, {"catB": "H|M|L"},...,{"catX": "H|M|L"} "overall_category_diversity": "H|M|L", "History": [ { "item_id": "...", "title": "...", "category": "...", "average_rating": n, "rating_number": n, "user_rating": n, "cat_item_price_tag": "H|M|L" } ] } 

Generation Rules • Produce FIVE USER PERSONA in 3–4 sentences (at least 3). 

• Use USER SPECIFIC INPUTS then history. 

• Map levels to language: H=High, M=Middle, L=Low signal in <cate-gory>. <NOTIONS of USER SPECIFIC INPUTS> 

• category_price : Price class by category of items interacted with. 

• category_rating : Average rating level of items within each category. 

• category_popularity : Item popularity (review count) per category. 

• category_familiarity : Interaction frequency within each category. 

• category_diversity : Number of different categories explored overall. 

Output Format { "User ID": "<user_id>", "Profiles": { "price_centric": { "persona": "..." }, "quality_centric": { "persona": "..." }, "popularity_centric": { "persona": "..." }, "category_preference": { "persona": "..." }, "category_diversity": { "persona": "..."} 

}

Example Result { "User ID": "<AXXXX>", "Profiles": { "price_centric": { "persona": "This user tends to prefer higher prices in categories such as Luggage & Travel Gear, Women, and Westlake, indicating a willingness to invest in premium,..., However, the user leans toward lower-priced options in the Novelty & More category, suggesting a more budget-conscious approach there." }, "quality_centric": { "persona": "The user shows a strong preference for high-rated items in the Men category, indicating a high regard for quality,..., In the Women and Novelty & More categories, the user prefers items with moderate ratings, suggesting a balance" }, "popularity_centric": { "persona": "This user prefers highly popular items in the Women, Men, and Westlake categories, indicating a tendency to follow mainstream trends" }, "category_familiarity": { "persona": "The user shows a strong familiarity with the Women and Novelty & More categories, indicating a frequent engagement,..., The user also has a moderate familiarity with Luggage & Travel Gear, Men, and Westlake categories." }, "category_diversity": { "persona": "This user exhibits a moderate level of category diversity, exploring a variety of categories such as Women, Men, and Luggage & Travel Gear,..., well-rounded interest in different areas of the Clothing, Shoes, and Jewelry domain." 

} } Multi-TAP: Multi-criteria Target Adaptive Persona Modeling for Cross-Domain Recommendation 

Table 11: Performance comparison (%) of Multi-TAP on all remaining cross-domain pairs from the Amazon dataset Domain Metrics (@5) Single-Domain Methods Cross-Domain Methods Multi-TAP 

(Source → Target) BPRMF NGCF LightGCN UniCDR CD-IMF CUT- LightGCN PPA DGCDR Cloth → Toys HR 1.09 0.91 0.91 1.09 1.32 1.61 1.52 1.92 2.33 

NDCG 0.30 0.16 0.35 0.31 0.38 0.46 0.52 0.55 0.76 

Toys → Cloth HR 2.18 0.91 2.18 2.96 3.05 3.28 3.46 3.33 4.01 

NDCG 0.58 0.22 0.57 0.75 0.75 0.79 0.81 0.80 1.11 

Elec → Cloth HR 1.52 0.50 1.18 1.44 1.34 1.49 1.58 1.52 2.18 

NDCG 0.44 0.16 0.38 0.39 0.37 0.48 0.49 0.47 0.60 

Cloth → Elec HR 0.86 0.68 1.03 0.95 1.10 1.28 2.58 2.31 2.58 

NDCG 0.25 0.23 0.29 0.26 0.31 0.36 0.60 0.50 0.61 

Elec → Sports HR 0.50 1.01 1.69 1.55 1.78 1.81 2.03 1.84 2.01 NDCG 0.31 0.31 0.68 0.42 0.48 0.54 0.71 0.57 0.65 Sports → Elec HR 1.72 1.37 0.86 1.30 1.48 1.66 2.40 2.11 2.88 

NDCG 0.58 0.47 0.21 0.36 0.41 0.47 0.63 0.52 0.90 

Elec → Toys HR 0.47 0.71 1.19 1.10 1.35 1.72 3.34 2.71 3.98 

NDCG 0.27 0.31 0.45 0.30 0.38 0.50 1.12 0.91 1.34 

Toys → Elec HR 1.21 0.72 1.70 1.45 1.62 1.88 4.17 3.01 4.33 

NDCG 0.50 0.25 0.49 0.40 0.46 0.54 1.30 0.89 1.41 

Home → Cloth HR 0.67 1.01 1.52 1.60 1.78 1.95 3.39 2.65 3.71 

NDCG 0.30 0.41 0.51 0.44 0.49 0.55 0.91 0.79 0.98 

Cloth → Home HR 1.02 0.68 1.36 1.25 1.42 1.60 3.41 2.71 3.24 NDCG 0.30 0.14 0.32 0.34 0.40 0.46 0.82 0.62 0.72 Home → Sports HR 1.36 0.84 1.35 1.40 1.55 1.75 2.71 2.12 2.74 

NDCG 0.33 0.26 0.58 0.38 0.43 0.51 0.87 0.71 0.90 

Sports → Home HR 1.01 0.68 1.19 1.20 1.35 1.55 2.56 2.24 3.41 

NDCG 0.29 0.17 0.32 0.33 0.38 0.45 0.65 0.51 0.78 

Sports → Toys HR 0.91 0.72 0.91 0.95 1.10 1.32 2.00 1.70 2.18 

NDCG 0.24 0.15 0.28 0.26 0.31 0.38 0.61 0.51 0.75 

Toys → Sports HR 1.27 1.09 2.21 2.10 2.35 2.75 3.46 3.01 3.46 

NDCG 0.46 0.28 0.77 0.58 0.65 0.78 0.99 0.83 0.95 Daehee Kang and Yeon-Chang Lee 

Figure 6: Additional analysis of intra-domain category-level preference heterogeneity. Each heatmap visualizes the conditional preference preservation ratio, measuring how consistently users maintain their dominant preference label when moving from a base category ( 𝒚 -axis) to a compared category ( 𝒙 -axis).