Title: An Intent of Collaboration_camera ready_v2

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.12018v1

Published Time: Fri, 13 Mar 2026 01:03:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
The appropriate copyright/licence statement will be pasted here later when the publication contract is ready. This text field 

should be large enough to hold the appropriate release statement. 

# An Intent of Collaboration : On Agenc ies between 

# Designers and Emerging (Intelligent ) Technologies 

Lin, Pei -Ying ab*; Heij, Julie ab; Borst, Iris ab; Joosten, Britt ab; Andersen, Kristina a; I Jsselsteijn, Wijnand a 

> a

Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands  

> b

Authors make equal contribution to the paper 

* p.y.lin@tue.nl ; pei@peiyinglin.net 

Amidst the emergence of powerful intelligent technologies such as LLMs and text -to -image AIs that 

promise to enhance creative processes, designers face the challenges of remaining empowered and 

creative while working with these foreign digital partners. Wh ile generative AIs offer versatile, 

informative, and occasionally poetic outcomes, their lack of embodied knowledge presents an even 

greater challenge to designers in gaining fruitful outcomes, such as in the field of Digital Craftsmanship. 

In this project , three designers embarked on a three -month experimental journey with an intention to 

co -create with Google’s LLM as a potential intelligent partner to investigate how it will influence the 

designers’ creativity. We found that a power dynamic of agencies e xists between the LLM and the 

designer, in which the designer can easily lose their creative agency. Regaining the designer’s creative 

agency involves introspection into their own creative process, a structural understanding of the specific 

emerging techno logy involved, and deliberate adjustments to the dynamics of the human -technology 

relationship. We propose paying attention to the designer’s inner world and parties of agencies when 

engaging with emerging intelligent technologies through three aspects: th e sensitivity towards a 

creative process as cognitive activities; the active investigation into specific technology’s capability; and 

the adjustment towards an appropriate working relationship between the designer and the emerging 

technology .

Keywords: design agency ; empowerment; more -than -human ; creativity .

# 1 Introduction 

Designers are always at the frontier of adopting emerging technologies for wider design opportunities, 

especially in the field of HCI. Often, they are confronted with the challenge of adapting their creative 

processes to emerging technologies that were invented for an engineering interest instead of a 

designerly one. Where engineering pursues solutionist approaches focused on optimisation, 

perfection, and realism, design may favour exploratory approaches that celebrate glitches, embrace 

surprises, and gener ate novel aesthetics. Since the interest and problem space for engineering and 

design can be drastically different, these emerging technologies often lack considerations for design 2

practices. The disparity between designers’ needs within their creative processes versus the 

functionality of emerging technologies often demands that designers make active adjustments in their 

approaches, both process -wise and perspective -wise. In our research, we a re interested in finding the 

perspective adjustments that designers make that might bring innovation to the design practice itself ,

similar to how the camera made artists think differently about imagery , compared to the paintings 

they knew when the camera was first invented. We took the textile making process as an exemplar 

for studying the meeting of physical (embodied) practices with digital intelligent technologies, which 

is often categorised as Digital Craftsmanship in HCI studies. We propose the textile making process as 

a complex process, where its complexity cannot be reduced to tackle the nuances within human and 

intelligent technologies collaboration (Lin & Witkowski, 2025) and position human cognition in the 

centre of study (Malafouris, 2013) for insights . Additionally, we use the gap between digital and the 

physically embodied for highlighting the mundane within the creative processes for observatio n

(Crabtree et al., 2023) .

Current emerging intelligent technologies are often designed in computer science labs and are being 

used in areas they were not designed for, such as the recent development of Artificial Intelligence (AI) 

since 2022 with Large Language Models (LLM) and text -to -image AIs. These platforms were invented 

through the exploration of algorithms and digital datasets that are based solely within the digital space .

These emerging platforms tend to be powerful , with digital matters such as texts, concepts, and digital 

images , giving promises for making creative processes faster and more inspiring . However, when 

engaged with textile making, they became uninformative due to lacking the physical, tactile, and 

embodied informatio n. Although concepts and images could work for the creative processes, they are 

often far from actionable or render the designers (and artists) non -creativ e (Halperin & Rosner, 2025) .

With the conflicting perception that these emerging generative AI platforms can be useful for creative 

practices but potentially also limiting and harmful, we decided to take a practice -based Research 

through Design (Frayling, 1994) approach to unpack and observe generative AI at work within creative 

processes. We asked how generative AI can be a designer’s creative partner, and what it takes to work 

with AI .

In this project, we explore the nuance of creative processes both from the extrospective (the making 

process) and the introspective (designer’s mental state) when designers are confronted with emerging 

technologies whose abilities were not tailored for the ir need but promised to be intelligent and 

potentially ‘sentient’ or ‘autonomous’. Through taking AI as non -human within the More -Than -Human 

framework and setting up the challenge of having AI as a co -creation partner in textile making, this 

paper presents our journey working with LLM on textile making that was highly frustrating and 

disempowering and the effort of being empowered again. We approach the ‘intent of collaboration’ 

through the More -than -Human perspective and see it as an assemblage with distributed agency 

(Bennett, 2010; Wakkary, 2021) from the perspective of the humans, as opposed to the de -centring 

human approach (Nicenboim et al., 2024) to observe the natural changes designers would face 

introspectively. The analysis of our first -person perspective (Desjardins et al., 2021) working diaries 

was done by using frustration as the anchor to examine the emotional and cognitive changes in our 

making journeys. We have found that there exists a power dynamic between humans and AI, which 

requires designers to develop sensitivity to the positionality of AI , for the designer to regain their 

creative agency. Through this project, we have shown three mutually reinforcing aspects : 1) a 

demonstration of noticing the cognitive nuances within designers when working with emerging 3

technologies that were designed without specific functional purposes; 2) the power play between 

humans and emerging technology within a creative process; 3) the dynamic of designer’s diminishing 

creative agency and potential pathways for its reclamation. Our contribution suggests that working 

with emerging technology is a process of learning where agency plays an important role , and such 

agency is a dynamic, relational construct that requires deliberate considerations by the designer . To 

remain an empowered designer requires a good understanding of the cognitive activities within one’s 

own creative practices and being conscious of the designer ’s own agency and the agencies delegated 

to the emerging technology they work with .

# 2 Background and Related Research 

2.1 Phenomenal Emergence of Generative AI 

In the spring of 2022, the launch of Midjourney (Midjourney, Inc., 2022) , StableDiffusion (Stability AI 

Ltd, 2022) and a major update to DALL·E (OpenAI, L.L.C., 2022a) marked a turning point for the creative 

industry, as it catalysed the widespread adoption of generative AI tools in artistic and design practices. 

Prior to this, generative AIs such as Disco -Diffusion (alembics, 2022) , adaptations of CLIP (Radford et 

al., 2021) and BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) , or Google Deep Dream (Mordvintsev, 2015) had their 

presence exclusive to new media artists with a proficient level of programming abilities. This new 

generation of generative AIs runs on supercomputer servers where users can access them through the 

internet, returning impressive images within min utes by giving simple descriptive sentences as 

prompts. The following year, Large Language Models such as ChatGPT (OpenAI, L.L.C., 2022b) , Claude 

(Anthropic, 2023) , and Bard / Gemini (Google, 2023) made their debut to the public, demonstrating 

the ease of text generation for narrations, coding, prompt generations, conversations, and many more. 

These AI platforms demonstrate versatile usage for diverse tasks, where prompt engineering has 

become an art in itself to steer generative AI outcomes in the desired direction (Giray, 2023; Liu & 

Chilton, 2022; Meskó, 2023) . It became an important question to look at how generative AI will 

influence the creative processes of designers .

2.2 HCI Research on Human -AI Creativity, Co -creation, and Collaboration 

The use of AI for design in the field of HCI ha s been widely studied. In particular to creativity and 

creations within design processes, there are subjects such as AI creativity (Boden, 1998, 2004; Boden 

& Edmonds, 2019; Hsueh et al., 2024) , AI -human collaboration and co -creation (Lin et al., 2024b; Liu 

et al., 2024; Rezwana & Maher, 2021) , designer’s expectation of AI (Yildirim et al., 2022, 2023) , AI 

facilitate d ideation (Davis et al., 2024; Jo et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024b; Mahdavi Goloujeh et al., 2024; 

Shin et al., 2023) , music generation (Park et al., 2024; Robson et al., 2024; Vear et al., 2024) ,

programming (Ferdowsi et al., 2024) , and searching for the design space (Fan et al., 2024; Huang et 

al., 2024; Shin et al., 2024) . Whilst the popularity of generative AI raises concerns that designer s

struggle for their agency while using AI tools (Mügge, 2024) and that AI ‘take s over all the fun part’, 

making creative workers become non -creative labourers (Cremer et al., 2023; Mügge, 2024) , the main 

trajectory of HCI study remain s in the objective, observative position when looking at the human -AI 

relationship. But like the history of computational art has shown us that computers change the 

thinking and making of art, how generative AI will demand designers to change internally can also be 

expected. In this project, we shift our focus from the interaction between humans and AI to the 4

proactive changes designers need in order to unleash their creativity while working with AI during the 

textile -making process .

2.3 Revealing the Nuance s within Textile -Making Processes 

Textile making has been known for being highly complex and dynamic, where materiality plays an 

important role in the process (Bennett, 2010; Ingold, 2010; Sennett, 2008) . Textile making and other 

craft practices have been conceptualised as an assemblage with vibrancy (Bennett, 2010; Deleuze et 

al., 1988) that consists of humans, machines, and materials, where each entities have its own agency. 

This complex system is often observed and analysed through the More -than -human framework, which 

sees design as something the human and non -human machines and materia ls perform together 

(Wakkary, 2021) and which cannot be studied in simplification (Bennett, 2010) .

In HCI research, Digital Craftsmanship emerges through combining digital systems and textile making, 

where human -computer interaction is being studied through textile making . For unpacking the 

complexity of textile making for human -computer interactions, documenting and investigating the 

details within the making process is highly valued (Goveia da Rocha et al., 2022a; Goveia Da Rocha et 

al., 2022; Lin et al., 2024a; Meiklejohn et al., 2024; Rutten et al., 2022) . Methods of how to pay 

attention to th e material, context, and landscape (Oogjes & Desjardins, 2024; Oogjes & Wakkary, 2022) 

have also been developed .

The delicacy of looking at the detailed interactions and happenings between humans, machines, 

materials, and AI makes the intersection of AI and digital fabrication a rich ground to investigate. For 

the purpose of observing the internal nuances of designer s ' creative processes, we set our challenge 

with an intent to co -create with AI in the highly embodied space of textile making. Our project is an 

attempt to dive deep into the perspectives of designers (humans) in this complex intersection to reveal 

the i mportant nuances for designers to work in this space .

# 3 Methods 

Our research investigates what is required for designers to work with emerging technology 

introspectively. We contextualised our research within textile making and generative AI, which allows 

us to adapt the tools of investigation developed for Digital Craftsmanship. In order to o bserve and 

analyse the textile -making processes in detail, a practice -based Research through Design approach is 

employed, which focuses on gaining knowledge through direct engagements in making rather than 

the final designed outcom e (Frayling, 1994) which facilitate us to look at the dynamics of internal 

relationships between entities within the assemblage in situ .

The project was set as a semester -long group project with three master students (2 nd , 3 rd , and 4 th 

authors) in Industrial Design in the autumn of 2023 as a given assignment. The authors took 2 months 

to create various textile samples with generative AI, where they documented the processes and had 

weekly meetings for reflection, and made adjustments accordingly. 

The making process, presented as ‘Studio Journeys’ in this paper, goes as follows: We asked if we 

could ‘co -create’ with generative AI, in this case, the LLM platform Bard (Google, 2023) . The making 

process began with each of the authors adopting one textile making technique (embroidery, crochet, 5

and weaving), where they feed an image of trivial choice into Bard (Google, 2023) , and ask for its 

contribution -- whether it be ideation, the technique of making , or reflection -- from which they would 

make the textile accordingly, document the process, and reflect. The authors had no prior expectation 

of what would be made from th is process, and they expected to find out with Bard. This iterative 

image -making -reflection process had taken place twice with two different images, the first generated 

by Midjourney (Midjourney, Inc., 2023) (Figure 1) and the second by Canva Image Generator (Canva, 

2023) (Figure 2) .

> Figure 1. Image of the sunset. Created by Midjourney.
> Figure 2. Image of an apple created by Canva Image Generator.

In the research, textile making was used as a method and the means to see the ‘iterative journey as a 

research outcome’ (Goveia da Rocha & Andersen, 2020) . The process is documented by using a revised 

version of Goveia da Rocha’s template for documenting samples (Goveia da Rocha et al., 2022a) with 

an additional section to keep track of the experiences from the conversations with Bard. The 

documentation is written in first -person perspective in order to explore the introspective aspect of 

the design process (Rutten et al., 2022; Tomico et al., 2012) .6

Three rounds of analysis and meta -analysis were done. The first analysis on the process and 

documentation was done immediately after the making process by the 2 nd , 3 rd , and 4 th author s in a 

qualitative manner (Braun & Clarke, 2006) . The s econd round of analysis and reflection w as done 12 

months after the making process , and the third round of analysis w as done 15 months after the making 

process . The second and third round s of analys es were done by the first author through semi -

structured interviews and discussions with 2 nd , 3 rd , and 4 th authors, along with meta -self -reflections 

from the 2 nd , 3 rd , and 4 th authors. 

# 4 Positionality of t he Designers 

In this project, the 2 nd , 3 rd , and 4 th authors were engaged in the making process , wh o will be referred 

to as the designers. Each one of them has chosen to engage in one textile fabrication technique to 

work with Bard. The positionality of these authors is reflected in their unique journey with Bard ;

therefore is listed as follows. 

The second author (2A hereafter) investigates our relationship with nonhumans from a first -person 

perspective through making. She aims to spark conversation with her designs about our possible 

futures and the role of the designer in this. The 2A chose to weave with Ba rd. She has no prior 

experience with weaving. 

The third author (3A hereafter) is a student in Innovation Management and Industrial Design and 

works as a part -time artist. She designs and researches how design concepts can be put into practice 

and create impact. Her work aims to combine a strategic way of thinkin g with the unexpected 

outcomes of material engagements and creation. The 3A had chosen to embroider with Bard. She 

had no prior experience working with Embroidery. 

The fourth author (4A hereafter) is a user -centred designer valuing aesthetics within her designs. In 

this research, she uses the fabrication method of crochet when co -creating with Bard. She has two 

year s of experience with crochet, making clothes and accessories for personal projects. 

# 5 The studio journeys 

Three designers’ attempts at co -creation with Bard are presented in the form of ‘studio journeys’ 

composed of textile samples following the textile -making development timeline in Figure s 4, 5, and 6 .

We use the notion of ‘studio journeys’ in reference to ‘becoming travellers’ in open -ended material 

making proposed by Goveia de Rocha and Andersen (Goveia da Rocha & Andersen, 2020) . The figures 

are to capture the internal cognitive struggles and shifts in correlation to the process of making. The 

detailed interaction between the designers and Bard is further presented with selected quotes from 

the conversation records with Bard. The j ourneys are divided into sub -journeys according to each 

sample. The designers supplement each sub -journey by scoring their agency versus Bard’s agency to 

emphasise the fluctuation of agency between the designers and Bard .

5.1 ‘Agency’ – the parameter that came in the third round of analysis 

During the second round and third round of analysis, we introduced parameters as tools to facilitate 

meta -reflections on our qualitative analysis. The parameters were not used for traditional quantitative 7

evaluation, but as anchor points to initiate discussions on the focus themes in -depth. For instance, in 

the second round of analysis, parameters ‘Acceptance’, ‘Collaboration’, and ‘Frustration’ were used 

as a guided discussion. These parameters later gener ate the discussion on ‘agency’. The evaluation of 

‘agency’ took a long discussion among the authors in the process of trying to identify what had 

happened between the designers and Bard. 

The designers noticed themselves being extremely frustrated and disempowered through the 

interaction with Bard. During the first analysis that took place immediately after the making process, 

the designers took the phenomenological outcome as strategies th at the designers developed to 

encounter their frustrating experience working with Bard. However, the designers find that strategies 

do not speak for the main emotional and cognitive effort required to make their co -creation with Bard 

fruitful. A second att empt to depict the emotional and cognitive effort was made by introducing the 

scoring of ‘Acceptance’, ‘Collaboration’, and ‘Frustration’. ‘Acceptance’ was used to describe each 

designer’s mentality towards accepting Bard’s capabilities in relation to thei r expectation of Bard 

during each textile -making process. The designers assumed Bard could be powerful and creative, 

considering many people were generating images, prompts for images, prose, or even programming 

codes with LLMs during that time (autumn of 2023). They slowly figured out that Bard was not how 

they expected it to be, not less powerful, but with different capabilities. ‘Collaboration’ was an 

emotional -cognitive parameter to evaluate the actual interaction versus the expected interaction of 

‘col laboration’ with Bard as a partner on equal footing. ‘Frustration’ was the parameter to trace the 

emotional activities of the designers in the making process. The authors find ‘Acceptance’, 

‘Collaboration’, and ‘Frustration’ are still insufficient to descr ibe both the internal emotional and 

cognitive understanding and active adjustments of the designers, nor do they describe the dynamic 

nature of Bard as a multifunctional LLM. 

The rating of ‘Agency’ of the two parties, the designer(s) and Bard, was eventually used to describe 

the dynamic negotiation of agencies between the human and the LLM as a perceptual description from 

a first -person perspective , the Sense of Agency (Gallagher, 2012) . For which, the ‘agency’ influences 

the designer’s decision. The ‘Designer’s agency’ describes how much agency the designer felt to have 

during that period of time, whereas ‘Bard’s agency’ describes how much agency has been given to 

Bard in the perception of the designer. These ratings were evaluated by each designer subjectively, in 

the argument that the agencies of the two parties were the result of the designer’s own cognitive 

construct. The ratings were not exact scores but vague ranges, where Bard’s a gency and Designer’s 

agency should be read together. As evidenced by the designers reflections, Bard's position is 

constantly renegotiated : sometimes in a dominant position, sometimes in a subordinate position, 

sometimes as a technician, and sometimes as nobody. These cognitive positions for Bard highly 

influence their subjective perception of creativity and agency, which comes as waves of 

disempowerment and empowerment as shown in Figures X. This perception of creativity and agency 

is fully internal, organic, and does not reflect their satisfaction of the final textile outcome. 

5.2 Plotting the journeys 

The journeys are plotted in the second round of analysis and revised in the third round of analysis. 

They were the tools that helped to distil the cognitive and emotional activities taking place within the 

designers, both through quotes and textile samples , in order to allow textile samples (external results) 8

to be read in parallel to first -person reflections (internal activities). The journeys can be read following 

the description of Figure 3. The timeline in the centre is constructed chronologically according to each 

designer’s conversation with Bard. Each co lour of the timeline is one ‘chatroom’ with Bard. Bard works 

in a manner that users can open a chatroom with Bard, where Bard will have memories of all the 

previous conversations held within the chat room. Starting a new chat room means getting rid of 

prev ious memories and beginning a new conversation without memories. In the context of our project, 

the designers can make multiple samples while staying in the same chat room or start a new chat 

room. We divide the making processes according to each designer’ s definition of ‘stage’, which is 

similar to a subdivision of a project, indicating the mental stop point for each concept. The stages are 

indicated as shaped backgrounds with gaps in between. The quote selected for each stage shown is 

the designer’s summa ry of their interaction with Bard. The satisfaction score is the designer’s 

satisfaction towards the final textile outcome shown in the image. The turning point marks an 

important cognitive shift that the designer realised in their second round of analysis , which made a 

difference in how they feel towards their interaction with Bard . 

> Figure 3. Explanation of how to read the journeys. 9

5.2.1 The embroidery journey    

> Figure 4.Studio journey of the 3 rd author using embroidery as the technique.

The journey of the third author (Figure 4) consists of four different Bard conversations marked by four 

different coloured backgrounds. The third author’s journey began with trying to understand Bard’s 

ability and putting themselves in a secondary position. ‘I decided to follow Bard in its chain of thoughts 

and was surprised by its opinionated nature.’ The third author mentioned that Bard had mistaken the 

sunset image (Figure 1) for a cat. They followed Bard’s instruction and made the embroidered cat, 

took a ph otograph and uploaded it to Bard for its opinion. Bard criticised the cat and said everything 

was ‘a mismatch’. The third author decided to still follow the cat direction but have more personal 

input by choosing a hairy fabric for embroidery, which they up loaded to Bard and received praise for .

The third author became frustrated while making the third sample because Bard began to have 

recurring answers. The frustration led the third author to take charge of creative decisions and 

position Bard merely as a t echnical support in the third stage. During this stage, the third author felt 

empowered, while Bard’s agency declined. The turning point marks a significant cognitive realisation 

for the third author to consciously know where to position Bard in their maki ng process. Immediately 

after the turning point, we see that the Designer’s agency became higher than Bard’s agency, and the 

author is also more satisfied with the process. The enjoyment disappears in the last conversation due 10 

to recurring responses that ‘Bard started providing the same suggestions over and over again’, 

although the Designer’s agency is still higher than Bard's .

The dashed line marks the period where ‘collaboration’ was actively used in the prompts. However, 

we noticed that collaboration as a prompt does not guarantee to be truly ‘collaborative’, which is a 

recurring phenomenon in all three journeys where the desi gners became unmotivated by the end .

5.2.2 The crochet journey   

> Figure 5. Studio journey of the 4 th author using crochet as the technique.

The fourth author’s journey consists of three chats with Bard, divided into four stages (Figure 5). The 

fourth author felt frustrated upfront due to Bard’s unhelpful suggestions that ‘Bard could not generate 

a crochet pattern.’ The fourth author experiment ed to give Bard full agency: ‘I mostly followed Bard’s 

suggestions, hoping they would eventually lead somewhere useful. Bard also began interpreting the 

image differently after a while (as a water droplet).’ The fourth author made the water droplet, but 

al so decided to tell Bard that it was ‘wrong’, which sets the moment that the fourth author proactively 

took charge of the process. It was also the moment of a turning point. The image of an apple (Figure 

2) was uploaded to Bard, where the fourth author aske d Bard to ‘co -design with me to make a crochet 

artwork based on the image’. During the third stage, the Designer’s agency became slightly higher 

than Bard’s agency. The author also felt much more engaged in the process, where ‘it became more 

of a discussio n than blindly following a plan.’ For the fourth stage, the fourth author wrote that ‘the 11 

process overall was much more enjoyable because of the acceptance of Bards' abilities, his strengths 

and weaknesses. This awareness made me more engaged in decision -making, which ironically made 

the process feel slightly less collaborative than before. How ever, the overall experience was far more 

satisfying than in earlier samples as it showed how framing the prompt could influence the creative 

dynamic.’ In which the human -LLM relationship became less of a collaboration, but the designer felt 

more creative .

5.2.3 The weaving journey   

> Figure 6. Studio journey of the 2 ndauthor using weaving as the technique.

dhe second author’s journey consists of one continuous chat with Bard divided into five stages. The 

journey began with excitement. From Figure 6, we see that Bard’s agency was high while Designer’s 

agency was low during the first stage. The 2nd author wrote in their note in the second reflection: ‘I 

had the expectation that Bard would be able to generate patterns that would be easy to follow, and 

that Bard would not give multiple options for me to choose.’ And her 3rd reflection: ‘I felt dissatisfied 

with the level of the pattern that Bard had generated for me. …. I decided to make a simple pattern 

that Bard suggested, which is a very simplified version of the input image.’ In the second and third 

samples, we see the d esigner’s agency grew while Bard’s agency declined. It was triggered by Bard’s 

incapability for precision: ‘It was in this part of the chat that I started to notice that Bard’s “memory” 12 

was very limited. I had to repeat the colours I had available for weaving multiple times, which made 

the conversation rather frustrating.’ 

During the whole journey, the second author always delegated higher agency to Bard and never took 

control themselves. The Designer’s Agency is always rated lower than Bard’s agency on the journey. 

The second author expressed that this strategy was taken fo r the purpose of truly wanting to 

collaborate with Bard, which still failed in the end due to Bard being ‘repetitive’ and not giving new 

insights. However, the moment when the second author felt that ‘I had gotten to know Bard a bit 

better and understood b etter how to speak its “language”’, they explained, came after they gained 

awareness of what they wanted as a designer. Such awareness is gained through fully understanding 

the exact cognitive nuances engaged within the creative process and being capable o f being explicit 

about it while communicating with LLM. 

5.3 Four phases of power dynamic s between the designer and the LLM  

> Figure 7. Quotes from the self -reflection of the designers showing how the agency fluctuates between the designer and the
> LLM internally.

We noticed that there were 4 phases of development (Figure 7) where the definition of collaboration 

and agency fluctuates. In the first phase, Bard is being treated as the collaborator who knows all, 13 

indicating that the designers delegated high agency to Bard. In this phase, the designers entered 

prompts in Bard, received instructions from Bard, and executed accordingly. The designers prioritise 

Bard before themselves. In the second phase, the designer s started to notice the incapabilities of Bard, 

such as being forgetful, repetitive, and misinterpreting images. The designers went through the 

process of improvising the prompts and trying to make Bard work in the way they anticipated. 

Unfortunately, Bard still could not meet the expectation .

In the third phase, two designers (3A and 4A) decided to regain their own agency by having the 

confidence to take the lead, telling Bard that its answers were wrong. They clearly addressed the task 

Bard will need to perform for them and emphasised the word ‘collaboration’ in the chat. The designers 

treat Bard’s answers as inspirations and suggestions and see Bard as an assistant. As a result, the 

designers observed that there are fewer prompts in these stages because they follow their own plans 

rather than Bard’s. They also find this stage much more comfortable as a creative creation session. 

For 2A, although they did not proactively regain their own agency with Bard, they also noticed that 

being explicit about what they wanted from Bard made the collaborati on feel much more comfortable. 

For all the designers, they went through a learning curve of understanding Bard’s capabilities as well 

as a detailed understanding of the making process of their chosen textile technique, which allowed 

them to become empowere d to make design decisions and find a working communication method. In 

the fourth phase, a recession of agency took place. The designers got tired and let Bard take the lead. 

However, this also made the designers more frustrated .

We see that because the designers were working with a novel and powerful technology, most of their 

effort within the creative process went into understanding the technology and navigating through the 

struggle of agencies. In which, the process made them le arn about the nuances of their cognitive 

activities required for the creative textile making processes and acquire a conscious working 

positionality with the technology .

5.4 Agencies and mechanisms of regaining agencies   

> Figure 8.The mechanisms of relational agencies .

We have observed that the power play between the designer and LLM is relational and dynamic, and 

we dissect the mechanisms in Figure 8 in our interaction with Bard. The power dynamic plays between 

the designer’s internal status and the designer’s expectation of the LLM they work with, where the 

designer -LLM interaction provides opportunities for understanding and adjustments. In Figure 8, one 14 

can see that the designer’s expectation of Bard implicitly indicates the level of agency Bard has been 

given. In other words, Bard did not voluntarily choose a level of agency itself, its agency was delegated 

by the designer. The power dynamic between the designers and Bard was an organic process that 

consisted of four stages of interactions : 1) Questions & Feedback Overload, 2) Repetition of Reminders, 

3) Communication Development, and 4) Stable Communication. Each stage of interaction is a 

phenomenologica l manifestation of the designer’s expectations and internal condition. In the first 

stage, questions and feedback were overloaded. The designers were overwhelmed by the number of 

questions asked and the amount of feedback given. It happens under the premis e that the designer is 

expecting Bard as a superior guide, a wizard -that -knows -all. In this stage, the designers did not 

acknowledge their own expertise and let Bard take control. In stage 2, frustration towards Bard built 

up for the designers. By repetiti vely repeating their prompts to Bard, the designers also slowly realised 

that a superior guide is not the right perception for Bard. This results in lowering the relative 

positioning and agency for Bard. At the same time, the designers also slowly gain the ir own agency by 

adjusting the positioning of themselves. The designers then slowly allow their own existing knowledge 

of design to work alongside AI. In stage 3, a turning point is reached. The designers gave up their 

expectations of Bard and reckoned tha t some mental adjustment was needed. They re -evaluate their 

communication technique, such as using ‘co -design’ and ‘collaboration’ in the prompt and expect less 

from Bard, which puts the designer and Bard on an equal footing. In stage 4, the designers obta ined a 

reasonable expectation of Bard that fits with its capabilities, and the communication went smoother 

than before. The designers also reckon that at this stage, they finally felt that they could work with 

Bard constructively .

# 6 Discussion 

6.1 Importance of self -reflection while working with emerging technology 

Detailed self -reflection and documentation enabled us to observe the designer’s inner world when 

working with emerging technologies in highly complex and dynamic processes , and notice the power 

dynamic of agencies between humans and technology. In this project, we began by asking how to ‘co -

create’ with a LLM for an open -ended exploration. LLM s are an emerging technology in the sense that 

their abilit ies are versatile, rapidly updated, and there are no available protocols to work with. This 

entails that a c ertain level of learning and exploration is needed for humans while incorporating it into 

their own making processes. For designers, to have a fruitful ‘co -creation in an open -ended 

exploration’ with any emerging technologies is essentially a question of h ow the designer can feel 

‘creative’ while working with emerging technologies. This topic is subjective and highly complex, for 

too many aspects are involved, such as materials, machines, and context. In section 5.2, we see that 

it required three rounds of analysis and meta -reflections to identify that it was the agency dynamic 

that contributed to the designer’s frustration working with Bard. By focusing on the documentation 

and reflection of the process attached to an outcome instead of only evaluating the outcome, we 

noticed that satisfaction with the process does not relate to satisfaction with the outcome. This raises 

questions about the popular HCI research approach, where the generative AI outcomes were 

evaluated for creativity by the participants witho ut asking for their reflections on the process. Existing 

research such as Portfolio of Loose Ends (Goveia da Rocha et al., 2022b) captures the dynamic of 

influence between concurrent projects within the same space, and Design Bookkeeping (Meiklejohn 

et al., 2024) which records design process, samples, and decisions as a ledger, we argue that 15 

introspective reflections can reveal nuances of human -technology interaction to allow us find ways to 

work with emerging technologies .

6.2 ‘Agency ’ of the more -than -human partner is a relational concept th at requires 

deliberate decisions from the designer at work 

Section 5.5 shows that the perceived ‘agency’ of Bard by the designers is tightly related to the 

designer’s expectation of Bard. Bard, as the non -human collaborator in the three studio journeys, is 

positioned with different roles due to different expectations from the designer. The designer perceives 

their own agency versus Bard’s agency according to how they see their own role and position within 

the collaboration relationship to Bard’s given role , and this changed throughout the multi -stage 

engagement. De signers working with tools rarely have the need to think about what they expect from 

the tool, nor what agency should be given to the tool. However, working with more -than -human 

partners whose capabilities are implicit will bring designers into the space w here expectations can be 

versatile, modes of interactions can change, and a designer’s inner status fluctuates, resulting in what 

a designer might feel as a power dynamic between themselves and the more -than -human partner. In 

order to be empowered in the p rocess of working with more -than -human partners, we argue it is 

important to be conscious of the relational agency between the designer themselves and the more -

than -human partner , and to make decisions accordingly .

In Things We Could Design , Ron Wakkary argued on the basis of vital matters, that things have agentic 

qualities that ‘contribute to their own making and the making of other things’, which further led to 

the discussion of distributed agency within the assemblage that consist s of all the entities engaged 

within the making process (Wakkary, 2021) . How the agencies are distributed within the assemblage 

can be case -specific to the composition and dynamic of the assemblage, for instance, different when 

it is designed with a plant that has biological needs versus when it is designed with a computer 

algo rithm that does not have biological needs (Montemayor, 2023) . In our specific case, Bard has 

participated in the assemblage as an LLM without its own intention, where its agency was delegated 

by the designer through the designer’s expectation of it. This relational nature of human -technology 

relationship reveals an important aspect: Whilst whether AI can have ‘agency’ and ‘autonomy’ is still 

debatable within the field of Artificial In telligence, since it is highly dependent on how each AI is being 

designed and coded, as well as depending on the philosophical level i t is being discussed - in practice, 

we noticed that the human’s perceived agency of the AI is relational. Such a relational nature is 

correlated with the complexity of AI, which appears to be versatile and multi -functional, like a 

powerful black box. This relational agency should also be studied when looking at creativity agencies 

in human -technology collabora tions .

# 7 Conclusion 

We used Bard as an exemplar of emerging intelligent technology that is powerful, versatile, but not 

tailored to our textile -making process, to explore the challenges and struggles designers might face. 

Through in -depth documentation and self -reflection of our journey working with Bard, we found that 

designer’s sensitivity towards their inner positionality is crucial in navigating collaborations with 

technology. T he notion of felt ‘agency’ plays an important role in feeling creative and empowered 

within a st udio making process. We also notice that the felt agencies of the designer and of Bard are 

relational and dynamic , and that the process of making involves a process of the designer adjusting 16 

their expectation and interactions with the new, unknown technology they work with. We propose 

that in this time of Artificial Intelligence b loom, where technologies become more sophisticated and 

powerful, paying attention to the relational agencies between the designer and the technology by 

looking introspectively is key for creative professionals to remain creative and empowered. Our 

research also highlights the importance of thinking about the positionality of the designer ourselves 

when working in the m ore -than -human world , where Research -through -Design working methods with 

detailed documentation and self -reflections can provide keys for future design education in times of 

close human -technology collaboration (Khosravy et al., 2024) . Due to the time frame in which this 

project was conducted, we did not have the opportunity to explore more powerful LLM s and 

generative AI that w ould potentially demonstrate much more sophisticated behaviour and abilities. 

Additionally, emerging technologies such as nanotechnology, biotechnology, and augmented reality 

lie beyond the scope of the current study. However, their potential impact on designers’ inner worlds 

presents a compelling avenue for future exploration. Thes e areas will be left for subsequ ent research 

to investigate the evolving complexity of human –technology interaction and collaboration within 

creative processes .

# References 

alembics. (2022). Disco -Diffusion . https://github.com/alembics/disco -diffusion 

Anthropic. (2023). Claude (Version 1). Anthropic. https://www.anthropic.com/ 

Bennett, J. (2010). Vibrant matter: A political ecology of things . Duke University Press. 

Boden, M. A. (1998). Computer Models of Creativity. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Handbook of 

Creativity (1st edn, pp. 351 –372). Cambridge University Press. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511807916.020 

Boden, M. A. (2004). The creative mind: Myths and mechanisms (2nd ed). Routledge. 

Boden, M. A., & Edmonds, E. A. (2019). From fingers to digits: An artificial aesthetic . The 

MIT Press. 

Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research 

in Psychology , 3(2), 77 –101. https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa 

Canva. (2023). Canva Image Generator . Canva Image Generator. https://www.canva.com/ai -

image -generator/ 17 

Crabtree, A., Lodge ,Tom, Sailaja ,Neelima, Chamberlain ,Alan, Coulton ,Paul, 

Pilling ,Matthew, & and Forrester, I. (2023). Experiencing the future mundane: 

Configuring design fiction as breaching experiment. Human –Computer Interaction ,

0(0), 1 –30. https://doi.org/10.1080/07370024.2025.2454555 

Cremer, D. D., Bianzino, N. M., & Falk, B. (2023, April 13). How Generative AI Could 

Disrupt Creative Work. Harvard Business Review . https://hbr.org/2023/04/how -

generative -ai -could -disrupt -creative -work 

Davis, R. L., Wambsganss, T., Jiang, W., Kim, K. G., Käser, T., & Dillenbourg, P. (2024). 

Fashioning Creative Expertise with Generative AI: Graphical Interfaces for Design 

Space Exploration Better Support Ideation Than Text Prompts. Proceedings of the 

CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 –26. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642908 

Deleuze, G., 1925 -1995., Guattari, F., 1930 -1992., & Massumi, B. (1988). A thousand 

plateaus: Capitalism and schizophrenia . Athlone Press; WorldCat. 

Desjardins, A., Tomico, O., Lucero, A., Cecchinato, M. E., & Neustaedter, C. (2021). 

Introduction to the Special Issue on First -Person Methods in HCI. ACM Transactions 

on Computer -Human Interaction , 28 (6), 1 –12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3492342 

Devlin, J., Chang, M. -W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2019). BERT: Pre -training of Deep 

Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding (arXiv:1810.04805). arXiv. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1810.04805 

Fan, X., Wu, Z., Yu, C., Rao, F., Shi, W., & Tu, T. (2024). ContextCam: Bridging Context 

Awareness with Creative Human -AI Image Co -Creation. Proceedings of the CHI 

Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 –17. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642129 18 

Ferdowsi, K., Huang, R. (Lisa), James, M. B., Polikarpova, N., & Lerner, S. (2024). 

Validating AI -Generated Code with Live Programming. Proceedings of the CHI 

Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 –8. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642495 

Frayling, C. (1994). Research in Art and Design (Royal College of Art Research Papers, Vol 

1, No 1, 1993/4) . Royal College of Art. https://researchonline.rca.ac.uk/384/ 

Gallagher, S. (2012). Multiple aspects in the sense of agency. New Ideas in Psychology ,

30 (1), 15 –31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.newideapsych.2010.03.003 

Giray, L. (2023). Prompt Engineering with ChatGPT: A Guide for Academic Writers. Annals 

of Biomedical Engineering , 51 (12), 2629 –2633. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10439 -023 -

03272 -4

Google. (2023). Google Bard (Version 2023). Google. https://bard.google.com/ 

Goveia da Rocha, B., & Andersen, K. (2020). Becoming Travelers: Enabling the Material 

Drift. Companion Publication of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems 

Conference , 215 –219. https://doi.org/10.1145/3393914.3395881 

Goveia da Rocha, B., Andersen, K., & Tomico, O. (2022a). Portfolio of Loose Ends. 

Designing Interactive Systems Conference , 527 –540. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3532106.3533516 

Goveia da Rocha, B., Andersen, K., & Tomico, O. (2022b). Portfolio of Loose Ends. 

Designing Interactive Systems Conference , 527 –540. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3532106.3533516 

Goveia Da Rocha, B., Spork, J., & Andersen, K. (2022). Making Matters: Samples and 

Documentation in Digital Craftsmanship. Sixteenth International Conference on 

Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction , 1 –10. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3490149.3502261 19 

Halperin, B. A., & Rosner, D. K. (2025). “AI is Soulless”: Hollywood Film Workers’ Strike 

and Emerging Perceptions of Generative Cinema. ACM Transactions on Computer -

Human Interaction , 32 (2), 1 –27. https://doi.org/10.1145/3716135 

Hsueh, S., Ciolfi Felice, M., Alaoui, S. F., & Mackay, W. E. (2024). What Counts as 

‘Creative’ Work? Articulating Four Epistemic Positions in Creativity -Oriented HCI 

Research. Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 

Systems , 1 –15. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642854 

Huang, R., Lin, H., Chen, C., Zhang, K., & Zeng, W. (2024). PlantoGraphy: Incorporating 

Iterative Design Process into Generative Artificial Intelligence for Landscape 

Rendering. Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 

Systems , 1 –19. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642824 

Ingold, T. (2010). The textility of making. Cambridge Journal of Economics , 34 (1), 91 –102. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/cje/bep042 

Jo, H. -Y., Suzuki, R., & Kim, Y. (2024). CollageVis: Rapid Previsualization Tool for Indie 

Filmmaking using Video Collages. Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human 

Factors in Computing Systems , 1 –16. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642575 

Khosravy, M., Gupta, N., Pasquali, A., Dey, N., Crespo, R. G., & Witkowski, O. (2024). 

Human -Collaborative Artificial Intelligence Along With Social Values in Industry 

5.0: A Survey of the State -of -the -Art. IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and 

Developmental Systems , 16 (1), 165 –176. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/TCDS.2023.3326192 

Lin, P. -Y., Andersen, K., & Ijsselsteijn, W. (2024a). Knitting the Sea Slugs – a

Demonstration of a Human -AI -Machine -Material Assemblage. Designing Interactive 

Systems Conference , 318 –322. https://doi.org/10.1145/3656156.3665422 20 

Lin, P. -Y., Andersen, K., Schmidt, R., Schoenmakers, S., Hofmeyer, H., Pauwels, P., & 

Ijsselsteijn, W. (2024b). Text -to -Image AI as a Catalyst for Semantic Convergence in 

Creative Collaborations. Designing Interactive Systems Conference , 2753 –2767. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3643834.3661543 

Lin, P. -Y., & Witkowski, O. (2025). The Woven Mind: Ada Lovelace, Intuitive Computing, 

and Creative Machines. Proceedings of the Artificial Life Conference 2025 , 61 –70. 

Liu, V., & Chilton, L. B. (2022). Design Guidelines for Prompt Engineering Text -to -Image 

Generative Models. CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 –23. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3501825 

Liu, Y., Chen, S., Cheng, H., Yu, M., Ran, X., Mo, A., Tang, Y., & Huang, Y. (2024). How 

AI Processing Delays Foster Creativity: Exploring Research Question Co -Creation 

with an LLM -based Agent. Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in 

Computing Systems , 1 –25. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642698 

Mahdavi Goloujeh, A., Sullivan, A., & Magerko, B. (2024). Is It AI or Is It Me? 

Understanding Users’ Prompt Journey with Text -to -Image Generative AI Tools. 

Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 –13. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642861 

Malafouris, L. (2013). How things shape the mind: A theory of material engagement . MIT 

Press. 

Meiklejohn, E., Devendorf, L., & Posch, I. (2024). Design Bookkeeping: Making Practice 

Intelligible through a Managerial Lens. Designing Interactive Systems Conference ,

35 –49. https://doi.org/10.1145/3643834.3660754 

Meskó, B. (2023). Prompt Engineering as an Important Emerging Skill for Medical 

Professionals: Tutorial. Journal of Medical Internet Research , 25 , e50638. 

https://doi.org/10.2196/50638 21 

Midjourney, Inc. (2022). Midjourney (Version 1). Midjourney, Inc. 

https://www.midjourney.com 

Midjourney, Inc. (2023). Midjourney (5.1). Midjourney, Inc. https://www.midjourney.com 

Montemayor, C. (2023). The Prospect of a Humanitarian Artificial Intelligence: Agency and 

Value Alignment . Bloomsbury Academic. 

Mordvintsev, A. (2015, July 13). Inceptionism: Going Deeper into Neural Networks . Google 

Research. https://research.google/blog/inceptionism -going -deeper -into -neural -

networks/ 

Mügge, D. (2024, October 23). AI Is Threatening More Than Just Creative Jobs —It’s 

Undermining Our Humanity . https://www.socialeurope.eu/ai -is -threatening -more -

than -just -creative -jobs -its -undermining -our -humanity 

Nicenboim, I., Søndergaard, M. L. J., Lindley, J., Reddy, A., Strengers, Y., Redström, J., & 

Giaccardi, E. (2024). Unmaking -with AI: Tactics for Decentering through Design. 

ACM Transactions on Computer -Human Interaction , 31 (6), 1 –20. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3685275 

Oogjes, D., & Desjardins, A. (2024). A temporal vocabulary of Design Events for Research 

through Design. Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 

Systems , 1 –12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642560 

Oogjes, D., & Wakkary, R. (2022). Weaving Stories: Toward Repertoires for Designing 

Things. CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 –21. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3501901 

OpenAI, L.L.C. (2022a). Dall -E (Version 2). OpenAI, L.L.C. https://openai.com/dall -e-3

OpenAI, L.L.C. (2022b). ChatGPT (3.5). OpenAI, L.L.C. https://chat.openai.com/ 

Park, J., Shin, H., Oh, C., & Kim, H. Y. (2024). “Is Text -Based Music Search Enough to 

Satisfy Your Needs?” A New Way to Discover Music with Images. Proceedings of 22 

the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 –21. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642126 

Radford, A., Kim, J. W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry, G., Askell, 

A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., Krueger, G., & Sutskever, I. (2021). Learning Transferable 

Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision (arXiv:2103.00020). arXiv. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2103.00020 

Rezwana, J., & Maher, M. L. (2021). COFI: A Framework for Modeling Interaction in 

Human -AI Co -Creative Systems. In A. G. de S. Garza, T. Veale, W. Aguilar, & R. P. 

y Pérez (Eds), Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on Computational 

Creativity, México City, México (Virtual), September 14 -18, 2021 (pp. 444 –448). 

Association for Computational Creativity (ACC). 

https://computationalcreativity.net/iccc21/wp -content/uploads/2021/09/Wkshp2.pdf 

Robson, N., McPherson, A., & Bryan -Kinns, N. (2024). Thinking with Sound: Exploring the 

Experience of Listening to an Ultrasonic Art Installation. Proceedings of the CHI 

Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 –14. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642616 

Rutten, N., Rouschop, J., Mathiasen, L., Tomico, O., Goveia Da Rocha, B., & Andersen, K. 

(2022). Flipping Pages: Exploring Physical Workbooks as Reflective Method for 

Documentation. Nordic Human -Computer Interaction Conference , 1 –14. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3546155.3547296 

Sennett, R. (2008). The craftsman . Yale University Press. 

Shin, D., Wang, L. L., & Hsieh, G. (2024). From Paper to Card: Transforming Design 

Implications with Generative AI. Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human 

Factors in Computing Systems , 1 –15. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642266 23 

Shin, J. G., Koch, J., Lucero, A., Dalsgaard, P., & Mackay, W. E. (2023). Integrating AI in 

Human -Human Collaborative Ideation. Extended Abstracts of the 2023 CHI 

Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 –5. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3544549.3573802 

Stability AI Ltd. (2022). StableDiffusion (1.1). Stability AI Ltd. https://stability.ai/stable -

image 

Tomico, O., Winthagen, V. O., & van Heist, M. M. G. (2012). Designing for, with or within: 

1st, 2nd and 3rd person points of view on designing for systems. Proceedings of the 

7th Nordic Conference on Human -Computer Interaction: Making Sense Through 

Design , 180 –188. https://doi.org/10.1145/2399016.2399045 

Vear, C., Hazzard, A., Moroz, S., & Benerradi, J. (2024). Jess+: AI and robotics with 

inclusive music -making. Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in 

Computing Systems , 1 –17. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642548 

Wakkary, R. (2021). Things we could design: For more than human -centered worlds . The 

MIT Press. 

Yildirim, N., Kass, A., Tung, T., Upton, C., Costello, D., Giusti, R., Lacin, S., Lovic, S., 

O’Neill, J. M., Meehan, R. O., Ó Loideáin, E., Pini, A., Corcoran, M., Hayes, J., 

Cahalane, D. J., Shivhare, G., Castoro, L., Caruso, G., Oh, C., … Zimmerman, J. 

(2022). How Experienced Designers of Enterprise Applications Engage AI as a 

Design Material. CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 –13. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3517491 

Yildirim, N., Oh, C., Sayar, D., Brand, K., Challa, S., Turri, V., Crosby Walton, N., Wong, 

A. E., Forlizzi, J., McCann, J., & Zimmerman, J. (2023). Creating Design Resources 

to Scaffold the Ideation of AI Concepts. Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Designing 24 

Interactive Systems Conference , 2326 –2346. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3563657.3596058 

About the Authors: 

Pei -Ying Lin : (http://peiyinglin.net) is an artist, designer, and researcher in 

Science/Art who works with More-than-Human others including viruses, bacteria, 

textile, and AI. She is a PhD student at TU/e , resident artist of RepliFate, F Fellow of 

Royal Shakespeare Company and MIT ODL .

Julie Heij : is a master student in Industrial Design at TU Eindhoven. Her research 

explores relationality and slowness in design through making. She investigates how 

textile tools and techniques can challenge acceleration while fostering responsibility, 

attunement, an d more sustainable, interconnected practices. 

Iris Borst : is a master's student in Innovation Management and Industrial Design at 

the TU Eindhoven. She focuses on system -oriented design with an emphasis on multi -

stakeholder inclusion and interdisciplinarity. Her work aims to bridge academic 

insights with practica l applications to support industry transitions. 

Britt Joosten : is a Master graduate in Industrial Design at TU Eindhoven. Her design 

research explores mental wellbeing and user engagement, with a focus on embodied 

interaction. She values aesthetics, usability, and simplicity in tangible designs that 

enhance daily life .

Kristina Andersen : is an associate professor at the Department of Industrial Design 

at Eindhoven University of Technology (TU/e). Her work is concerned with how we 

can allow each other to imagine our possible technological futures through digital 

craftsmanship and material practic es. 

Wijnand IJsselsteijn : Prof. Wijnand IJsselsteijn is a psychologist studying how 

technologies like VR and AI shape human behaviour, communication, learning, and 

wellbeing. His recent work emphasises human -robot interaction, AI in dementia care, 

and technology ethics. He holds the 2024/25 Distinguished NIA S-Lorentz Fellowship. 

Acknowledgement: This research is made possible by EAISI, the Eindhoven Artificial 

Intelligence Systems Institute, through the Exploratory Multidisciplinary AI Research 

(EMDAIR) grant (Project no. 64). We would like to also thank Stephan Wensveen and 

Lenneke Kuijer for providing the opportunity to conduct this research within their 

Constructive Design Research course at Eindhoven University of Technology , and the 

technical supports from Wearable Senses Lab at Industrial Design Department at 

Eindhoven University of Technology .