Title: Opinion Dynamics in Learning Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.12137v1

Published Time: Fri, 13 Mar 2026 01:20:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# Opinion Dynamics in Learning Systems 

## Jiduan Wu 1,2 , Rediet Abebe ∗1,3 , and Celestine Mendler-Dünner ∗1,3 

> 1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, and Tübingen AI Center 

> 2

ETH Zurich 

> 3

ELLIS Institute Tübingen 

Abstract 

We propose and analyze a unified framework that interleaves peer-to-peer opinion dynamics with performative effects of learning systems. While network theory studies how opinions evolve via social connections, and performative prediction examines how learning systems interplay with individuals’ opinions, neither captures the emergent dynamics when these forces co-evolve. We model this interplay as a recursive feedback loop: a platform’s predictions influence individual opinions, which then evolve through social interactions before forming the training data for the next platform model update. We demonstrate that this co-evolution induces a novel equilibrium that qualitatively differs from standard network equilibria. Specifically, we show that standard predictive objectives act as a “homogenizing force" driving networks toward consensus even under conditions where classical opinion-dynamics models lead to disagreement. Further, we demon-strate how learning under partial observations creates spillover effects among individuals, even if individuals are not susceptible to peer-influence. Finally, we study a platform that systematically deviates from standard predictive objectives, and demonstrate how classical opinion-dynamics models underestimate the equilibrium response to node-level interventions. We complement our theoretical findings with semi-synthetic simulations on social network data. Combined, our results illuminate performativity as an important, so far neglected, qualifying factor in social networks. 

Figure 1: Peer-platform co-influence in opinion dynamics : (A) Individuals interact with a digital platform and update their opinion based on the recommended content they are exposed to. (B) Individuals’ opinions evolve through peer interaction. (C) The platform observes expressed opinions and updates their recommendations. 

# 1 Introduction 

The formation of opinions has traditionally been modeled as a social process unfolding through interper-sonal influence: individuals exchange views with their peers, update their beliefs, and gradually converge or polarize depending on the structure of the network and the strength of social ties. From classical 

> ∗

joint supervision. 

1

> arXiv:2603.12137v1 [cs.SI] 12 Mar 2026

models of diffusion (DeGroot, 1974; Holley and Liggett, 1975; Friedkin and Johnsen, 1990) to contempo-rary theories of polarization (Bail et al . , 2018), opinion dynamics have focused on how local interactions between peers aggregate into collective outcomes. However, this assumption no longer accurately reflects today’s society where digital platforms play an increasingly dominant role as a source of information. The effect of digital platforms on beliefs and opinions has been documented in various settings, ranging from preferences for restaurants (Anderson and Magruder, 2012) and travel providers (Ursu, 2018) to political leaning (Gauthier et al ., 2026; Huszár et al ., 2022). To account for such platform influence, several approaches have been proposed that model the effect of recommendations on opinions and networks. Among others, they discuss how predictions change beliefs, modify social ties, and mediate trust. However, while accounting for platform influence, these approaches predominantly treat platforms as static or exogenous to the opinion formation process. As a result, they miss how digital platforms respond to changing opinions and repeatedly distil aggregate information into future predictions. This coupling of opinions and predictions can influence collective outcomes over time, and spread information across subgroups, in a way that peer dynamics alone are not able to capture. To fill this gap and explain these phenomena, the core focus of this work lies on the interaction of individuals with predictive systems powering digital platforms. These are invisible learning algorithms that are continuously fed with behavioral data about users, make predictions about user preferences and determine what content to show next. Thus, even if designed to optimize predictive accuracy, such algorithms are not merely descriptive and static, but they co-evolve with the data they create, an effect studied under the umbrella of performative prediction (Perdomo et al ., 2020; Hardt and Mendler-Dünner, 2025). Thus, by means of predictive algorithms, platforms necessarily become active participants in the opinion formation process: predictions shape exposure, exposure shapes expressed opinions, and those expressions are used to retrain the very models that govern future exposure. This socio-technical feedback-loop is illustrated in Figure 1. Learning systems and opinions are recursively coupled: observations of opinions determine predictions and the performative effects of predictions determine opinions. In this way, learning systems add an overlaying structure to networks, coupling individuals across time and space. To advance our understanding of how the deployment of learning systems alters the opinions formation process, we blend models of social influence (Friedkin and Johnsen, 1990) with concepts from performative prediction (Perdomo et al., 2020). Using a minimal model for how predictions and opinions co-evolve, we hope to draw attention to how learning systems rewrite the rules of opinion dynamics, and induce effects that models of peer dynamics alone cannot explain. 

## 1.1 Our work 

Our proposed model of opinion formation interleaves peer interaction with platform dynamics in a recursive manner. The platform deploys a learning algorithm that provides predictions to individuals. Individuals interact with these predictions and update their opinions. Subsequently, opinions evolve through peer interactions, following the classical Friedkin-Johnsen model (Friedkin and Johnsen, 1990). The resulting expressed opinions are observed by the platform and inform future model deployments. This dynamic process of model updates and opinion formation repeats. An equilibrium state emerges where the platform has no reason to change its predictions based on observed data. This new equilibrium state depends on the choice of learning algorithm, the susceptibilities of individuals to platform influence, as well as traditional parameters, such as network structure and peer susceptibilities. With technical results and simulations, we perform investigations into the characteristics of this new equilibrium and illuminate interesting deviations from the classical network equilibria absent performativity. We start by focusing on perfect prediction, ignoring predictive inaccuracies or economic interests, instead, focusing entirely on the qualitative effects due to repeated prediction with performativity. We then discuss variants of this model through theoretical results and simulations. Our key findings are the following: 

• Performativity acts as a homogenizing force in networks. By echoing expressed opinions, pre-dictive systems can amplify the homogenizing effect of peer interaction. We demonstrate this 2at the example of perfect prediction. In particular, for our model, we prove that under natural assumptions on the network, the variance of opinions at equilibrium is negatively correlated with the platform susceptibility of individuals. Notably, in the limit of high susceptibility, a consensus is reached. This consensus emerges for any connected simple graph with arbitrary peer susceptibility, and without the need for a primitivity assumption. This stands in contrast with classical results in networks that cannot explain consensus under these conditions. 

• Performativity offers pathways for peer influence beyond the network topology. By aggregating data, extrapolating it to unobserved individual, and offering personalized predictions, information can flow through the platform absent any social connections. At the example of mean estimation with limited information we prove how individuals who are not susceptible to peer influence can indirectly be impacted by the opinions of their peers through model predictions. Furthermore, homogenizing dynamics within subcommunities can impact the entire population. 

• Peer-platform dynamics amplify platform control. Similar to amplifying peer dynamics, predictive systems can also amplify the effect of interventions at the node-level. This also applies to targeted actions by the platform. In particular, with a simple platform policy we showcase how deviations from perfect prediction for a single individual impact equilibrium opinions across the population. Notably, the influence spreads to individuals who are not susceptible to platform influence, in a way that would be underestimated by standard influence maximization results. We support our results with simulations of parametric learning settings on social network data and conclude with a discussion of future work. We hope our model and insights can spark further studies of performative feedback loops in social networks. We look forward to the insights, methods, and applications it enables. 

# 2 Preliminaries and related work 

Throughout this work graphs serve as a mathematical object to characterize interpersonal relationships in a population of individuals. Each node in the graph corresponds to an individual, and an edge between two nodes represents a social connection. Network graphs allow us to exploit structure in the population and reason about how information spreads from one individual to another. To characterize this process we build on established models of opinion dynamics in social networks, and we combine it with ideas from performative prediction in machine learning to understand how peer dynamics and learning dynamics interplay. In the following, we review related work in the two areas and introduce important concepts. 

The social network graph. We use G = ( V, E) to denote a connected undirected simple graph where V with V = [ n] is the set of nodes and E = {(i, j ) | i and j are connected } represents the set of edges. Assume each node i ∈ V represents an individual on the social network G. The adjacency matrix of G is denoted as A where aij = 1 if (i, j ) ∈ E , and aij = 0 otherwise. We denote the degree of each node as di and use deg : = diag (d1, · · · , d n). Each individual i on the network holds an opinion xi. We use the vector notation xxx = [ x1, ..., x n] to denote opinions of all n individuals in compact form. These opinions are our main subject of study and they can be influenced in different ways. 

## 2.1 Peer influence 

An individual’s opinion can be influenced by social interactions. This is the basis for the long-standing field of opinion dynamics that seeks to model how beliefs evolve on a social network graph. Early work by DeGroot (1974) describes belief evolution as a repeated linear averaging mechanism among neighbors in a graph and serves as a baseline model of consensus formation. Later, the influential Friedkin–Johnsen model (Friedkin and Johnsen, 1990, 1999) anchors individuals’ opinions in their initial beliefs, allowing persistent disagreement even in connected networks. There are numerous extensions and variations of these base models that consider stubbornness of individuals (Yildiz et al . , 2013), bounded confidence models (Rainer and Krause, 2002), as well as alternative mechanisms for the aggregation of opinions of peers (Mei et al ., 2022). We refer interested readers to recent reviews of 3opinions dynamics in social networks (Proskurnikov and Tempo, 2017; Peralta et al . , 2025). In our work, we build on opinion dynamics models to not only describe peer influence, but also to capture how performative effects of predictions spread across a population. More specifically, we build on the Friedkin-Johnsen model (Friedkin and Johnsen, 1990). It describes the iterative process of opinion formation across a graph with n nodes by the following recursion 

xxx(k+1) = ( In − Λα) xxxinit + Λ αWx xx(k). (1) where the vector xxx(k) ∈ [0 , 1] n denotes individuals’ opinions at time step k, with xxx(0) = xxxinit ∈ [0 , 1] n

referred to as individuals’ initial opinion. The influence matrix W defines how individuals weight the opinions of their peers during social interaction. This matrix is row-stochastic and constant. For the purpose of this work let W := deg −1A be a row-normalized version of the adjacency matrix A. Further, 

Λα = diag (α1, · · · , α n) with αi ∈ [0 , 1] parameterizes individuals’ susceptibility to peer influence. For 

αi = 0 individual i does not listen to their peers and maintains their initial opinion, and the larger αi,the more individual i is susceptible to peer influence. For αi ≡ 1, ∀i ∈ [n], the dynamics model in (1) recovers the linear averaging mechanism of the DeGroot model (DeGroot, 1974). The complement 

(1 − αi) is commonly referred to as the stubbornness parameter. 

Standard network equilibria. In the following, we use FJ k(xxxinit ) to denote the state of opinions 

xxx(k) after k discrete time steps of the Friedkin-Johnsen dynamics as defined in (1) when initialized at 

xxxinit . Similarly, we denote the equilibrium state for k → ∞ by FJ (xxxinit ). When αi < 1 for at least one individual i the dynamics are guaranteed to converge and the equilibrium can be characterized in closed form by FJ (xxxinit ) = ( In − ΛαW )−1(In − Λα)xxxinit (Friedkin and Johnsen, 1990). For the special case of DeGroot, i.e., αi ≡ 1, ∀i ∈ [n], the equilibrium corresponds to DG (xxxinit ) = lim t→∞ W t xxxinit 

while additional assumptions are required to guarantee convergence, typically expressed as a primitivity assumption on G, (see, e.g., DeGroot, 1974). We will use these standard network equilibria as a baseline for our analysis. 

## 2.2 Platform influence 

It has been widely documented that beyond peer interaction, the exposure to online content on digital platforms also shapes individuals’ opinions. For example, yelp recommendations shape restaurant choices (Anderson and Magruder, 2012), TV advertisements influences consumer preferences (Adomavi-cius et al . , 2013), and ranking algorithms shape clicks (Narayanan and Kalyanam, 2015; Ursu, 2018; Mendler-Dünner et al . , 2024). Phenomena such as the spreading of misinformation (Del Vicario et al . ,2016), filter bubble (Pariser, 2011), polarisation (Perra and Rocha, 2019), and echo chamber (Cinelli et al., 2021) can be unwanted outcomes from it. Prior work in opinion dynamics accounts for platform influence by modeling how platforms intervene on the network structure. For example, Pescetelli et al . (2022) treat platforms as an extra node in the graph and study their influence on consensus opinion. Zhou et al . (2024) and Chitra and Musco (2019) model the influence of platform recommendations as changes to the edge weights. Santos et al. (2021); Wang and Kleinberg (2023) study how link recommendations can influence network structure and equilibria. In our model, instead, everything that changes are the predictions and we focus on the coupling of opinions and future platform recommendations through data-driven model retraining. Akin to Jia et al . (2015, 2019) and Friedkin et al . (2016), we consider the evolution of opinions across multiple stages of peer interactions. But instead of reasoning about changes in the weighting of individuals through social dynamics, we leave the network untouched and study the evolution of opinions when the platform deploys an updated model in each instance. 

## 2.3 Performative prediction 

Predictive models are rarely static but repeatedly updated based on fresh data. If this data is influenced by the model itself it creates a dynamic in which predictions and data co-evolve. In the machine learning literature such learning dynamics have been formalized under the umbrella of performative prediction (Perdomo et al ., 2020). Convergence guarantees and equilibria are derived under different 4learning settings (e.g., Perdomo et al . , 2020; Mendler-Dünner et al ., 2020; Drusvyatskiy and Xiao, 2023; Wang et al ., 2025; Mofakhami et al . , 2023; Farina and Perdomo, 2026). While these results characterize the trajectory of the learner they do not speak to the implied influence of repeated model updates on the population. Instead, in this work the population affected by predictions is at the center of study. We analyze how platform influence and peer influence interplay, and how performative effects unfold when the population composes of networked individuals. Related works in performative prediction that study explicit models for the data generating process, such as rational agent models (Hardt et al . , 2016; Jagadeesan et al . , 2021), causal models (Mendler-Dünner et al . , 2022; Cheng et al . , 2024), or parametric models (Miller et al ., 2021; Izzo et al ., 2021), have not considered network effects among individuals. Wang et al . (2023); Narang et al . (2023); Saig and Rosenfeld (2025) consider network effects among decision makers. We refer to Hardt and Mendler-Dünner (2025) for a more comprehensive overview on the literature of performative prediction. For the rest of this work the most important concept we build on is the notion of performative stability, characterizing a fixed point of model retraining. 

Summary of notations. Before presenting our model it remains to set up necessary notation. We let (A)ij denote the entry at i-th row j-th column of matrix A. The transpose of a matrix A or a vector 

vvv are denoted by A⊤, vvv⊤ respectively. An identity matrix of dimension d is denoted by Id. We say that a real matrix is non-negative (positive) if all entries (A)ij are non-negative (positive). We write 

A = diag (a1, . . . , a d) for a diagonal matrix with entries (A)ij = ai for i = j and 0 otherwise. We denote 

A ≤ B if matrices A, B with same dimensions satisfying (A)ij ≤ (B)ij ∀i, j . The same convention is used for vectors. A non-negative square matrix A ∈ Rn×n is irreducible if ∀i, j ∈ [n], there exists 

mij ∈ N such that (Amij )ij > 0. We use σ(A) to denote the spectrum of the matrix A and ρ(A) to denote the spectral radius of A. Moreover, A is primitive if ∃m ∈ N such that (Am)ij > 0, ∀i, j ∈ [n].A non-negative matrix A is row-stochastic if P 

> j

Ai,j = 1 ∀i. We write a = O(b) if there exist constants 

C > 0 such that a ≤ Cb .

# 3 A model of peer-platform co-influence 

We propose a minimal model to describe evolving opinions subject to peer and platform influence. We consider a population of n networked individuals repeatedly interacting with a platform. During each interaction the platform recommends potentially personalized content which influences individuals opinions. Subsequently, individuals share opinions with their peers and influence each other. After a fixed time period, the platform observes expressed opinions and adjusts future predictions accordingly. To model this peer-platform co-influence, we treat each period of peer interaction as a separate instances of the Friedkin-Johnsen model where initial opinions depend on the platform’s active predictions. Subsequent instances are coupled in that predictions of the platform at instance t come from a predictive model trained on the expressed opinion of individuals at instance t − 1. We are interested in the long term equilibrium of this coupled dynamic. More concretely, we use t = 1 , 2, 3, ... to index separate instances of the Friedkin-Johnsen model. Accordingly, we use xxx(t)init to denote the initial opinion of individuals in instance t, and fff (t) ∈ [0 , 1] n

to encode predictions for the n individuals during instance t, and xxx∗ to denote individuals’ innate opinions. To model platform influence, we assume initial opinions are a biased version of individuals’ innate opinions, influenced by the predictions of the platform. The strength of the bias depends on individuals’ susceptibility to platform influence. More formally, 

xxx(t)init = ( In − Λβ )xxx∗ + Λ βfff (t). (2) We introduce the diagonal matrix Λβ = diag (β1, . . . , β n) with βi ∈ [0 , 1] to denote the susceptibility of each individual i ∈ [n] to platform influence. For βi = 0 , the initial state of individual i corresponds to their innate opinions x∗ 

> i

, akin to the classical interpretation of the Friedkin-Johnsen model. The larger 

βi, the more individual i’s opinion is confounded by the predictions. Then, given the initial opinion xxx(t)init , we assume peer dynamics follow the Friedkin-Johnsen model, as detailed in Equation (1) . This means, individuals repeatedly adjust their opinion based on the 5Algorithm 1 Algorithmically-mediated opinion dynamics 

Parameters: ααα, β ββ, K , a connected simple graph G

Input: Innate opinion xxx∗, platform algorithm Algo( ·) 

> 1:

fff (1) = Algo( xxx∗) 

> 2:

for t > 0 do  

> 3:

xxx(t)init = ( In − Λβ )xxx∗ + Λ βfff (t) ▷ (A) platform influence  

> 4:

xxx0 = xxx(t)init  

> 5:

for k = 0 , 1, 2, . . . , K − 1 do  

> 6:

xxxk+1 = ( In − Λα)xxx0 + Λ αWx xxk. ▷ (B) peer influence  

> 7:

end for  

> 8:

Platform observes expressed opinions xxx(t)ex = xxxK 

> 9:

fff (t+1) = Algo( xxx(t)ex ) ▷ (C) platform model update  

> 10:

end for 

opinion expressed by their neighbors in the graph, where αi encodes individual i’s susceptibility to peer influence. For αi = 0 individual i does not change their opinion during peer interactions. The number of peer interaction steps K performed in each instance is a free parameter in our model. For the digital platform, we let them observe expressed opinions after K steps of peer interaction. For each instance t we denote this observed state of opinions as 

xxx(t)ex := FJ K (xxx(t)init ).

Observations of xxx(t)ex then form the basis for the platform to retrain their predictive model; they determine predictions deployed by the platform at time step t + 1 . To indicate that a learning algorithm is involved in this step, we write 

fff (t+1) = Algo  xxx(t)ex 

. (3) The algorithm Algo (·) maps observations to predictions. It serves a flexible placeholder for the platform’s learning algorithm and we will discuss specific instantiations in the following sections. Think of the argument xxx as the variable that the platform observes, which is simultaneously the target of prediction. For this prediction task the platform might gather additional meta-data about individuals to train a parametric prediction model and potentially extrapolate data to unseen individuals. Similarly, they might only be able to observe noisy measurements. Factors like these can constrain the algorithms a platform is able to implement. However, we are not exposing these additional complexities for outlining our model for how peer and platform influence interplay. Our concrete model for this peer-platform co-influence on the evolution of opinions is summarized in Algorithm 1. 

## 3.1 Performative stability 

We are interested in the equilibrium opinions under our new model. This equilibrium differs from classical network equilibria characterizing converging peer dynamics due to the outer loop: even if peer dynamics equilibrate there might still be updates to the predictive model that cause opinions behave differently in the next instance. Thus, we say the dynamics in Algorithm 1 have converged if there is no reason for the platform to update their predictive model based on the data they observe. This means, the algorithm continues to recover the model that is already deployed—and hence it repeatedly recovers the same opinions after peer interaction. Following the terminology of Perdomo et al . (2020) we denote this equilibrium state performative stability .In our model, we say predictions fff PS are performatively stable iff they satisfy the following fixed point equation 

fff PS = Algo  FJ K (( I − Λβ )xxx∗ + Λ βfff PS ).

6We use xxxPS to denote the equilibrium opinions implied by fff PS , i.e., xxxPS = FJ K (( I − Λβ )xxx∗ + Λ βfff PS ).Throughout the paper, we discuss instantiations of our model where Algorithm 1 converges to a unique performatively stable point. Accordingly, the equilibrium of interest is 

lim  

> t→∞

FJ K

 xxx(t)init 

 → xxxPS . (4) Going forward, we characterize how xxxPS depends on βββ, ααα and K for different algorithmic strategies, and analyze how it differs from classical network equilibria emerging under the Friedkin-Johnsen model in isolation. A particularly interesting case of our model is when K → ∞ . Here the platform observes opinions at equilibrium and the performatively stable point corresponds to a state where both, learning dynamics and peer dynamics have converged. However, keeping K general allows for a more expressive algorithm and a more general analysis that can cover different length of the deployment cycle. Throughout, we refer to the reference point xxxFJ := FJ( xxx∗) as the platform-free equilibrium. 

# 4 Platform interaction couples opinions across time 

Predictions rely on observations of expressed opinions from the past. At the same time they influence opinions the moment they are used to make recommendations. This can couple instances of peer interaction happening at different time steps. To analyze the effects, we focus on perfect prediction. It represents an idealized case of model retraining where the platform can accurately predict the opinion of each individual in the network. Hence, the learning algorithm corresponding to 

Algo( xxx(t)ex ) := xxx(t)ex , t ≥ 1. (5) This baseline instantiation exposes important qualitative effects of performative learning systems without getting into the complexities of data collection, model training and uncertainty quantification. The effect we are interested here is how predictions introduce memory to peer dynamics, coupling instances across time. Namely, opinions from time step t impact dynamics at time step t + 1 through the information distilled into the machine learning model. For perfect prediction, the first instance of peer interaction ( t = 1 ) recovers the classical Friedkin-Johnsen dynamics anchored at xxx(0) = xxx∗. When individuals are platform oblivious we thus recover stan-dard dynamics. However when βi > 0 and t grows, platform interactions accumulate and our model devi-ates from this classical treatment. The next resulting equilibrium will differ qualitatively, as we will show. 

## 4.1 Performative stability 

We start by characterizing the learning dynamics under perfect prediction. Instantiating our model with the platform policy in Equation (5), we observe that the predictions fff admit the following recursion 

fff (t+1) = Ψ K

h

(In − Λβ )xxx∗ + Λ β fff (t)i

with ΨK := 

> K−1

X

> i=0

(Λ αW )i(In − Λα) + (Λ αW )K . (6) Predictions correspond to the expressed opinions after K steps of peer interaction. The initial opinions are a linear combination of the current predictions fff (t) and the innate opinion xxx∗. The matrix ΨK

characterizes peer influence during K consecutive steps of peer interaction, analogous to classical charac-terizations of opinion dynamics (e.g., Friedkin and Johnsen, 1990). Recall that W denotes the influence matrix, K the number of peer interaction steps in between model retraining rounds, and Λα the peer sus-ceptibility matrix. What is new to our work is an outer loop implied by repeated updates to the platform’s predictions. Interestingly, for the outer loop to converge it is sufficient that peer dynamics are stable. The next result characterizes the existence of a performatively stable equilibrium under perfect prediction. 

Proposition 1 (Existence of a unique performatively stable equilibrium) . Assume the population is characterized by a simple connected graph G, and ∃i : αi < 1. Consider a platform that performs perfect prediction of past data. Then, the equilibrium state xxxPS exists and is unique. 7Intuitively, the assumption on the peer susceptibilities implies that there is at least one “stubborn” individual that has non-zero weight on their initial belief. The assumption of connectivity makes 

ΨK aperiodic, which implies primitivity and drives the system to convergence. This assumption also coincides with the conditions that guarantee the existence of equilibrium under the Friedkin-Johnsen model (Parsegov et al . , 2016). Notably, the result in Proposition 1 holds for any value of βi ∈ [0 , 1] .This implies that our coupled dynamics (6) converge whenever the inner loop dynamics converge. We provide a general closed-form characterization of xxxPS in Appendix A.2 and discuss particular cases throughout this manuscript. As we just learned, platform susceptibilities do not matter for the existence of a performatively stable equilibrium, but they critically determine the rate of convergence and the resulting equilibrium opinions. The next result explains how higher platform susceptibility requires more platform retraining steps to reach performative stability. 

Proposition 2 (Convergence under repeated perfect prediction) . Under the same condition as Propo-sition 1, the opinions xxx(t)ex under perfect prediction converge towards xxxPS at a linear rate 

∥xxx(T )ex − xxxPS ∥2 = O(cT )

where c can be characterized as follows: 

• If βi < 1 ∀i ∈ [n] we have c = O(max i βi).

• If ∃i : βi = 1 and ρ(Ψ K Λβ ) < 1 we have c = ρ(Ψ K Λβ ).

• If ∃i : βi = 1 and ρ(Ψ K Λβ ) = 1 we have c = max {| λ| : λ ∈ σ(Ψ K Λβ ), |λ| < 1}.Thus, the convergence of the outer loop is governed by the individual who is most susceptible to platform influence. The case distinction arises because for βi = 1 dynamics are no longer anchored in the innate opinion of individual i. Furthermore, since ΨK is primitive, the last case needs to be treated differently. But in general, it holds that higher platform susceptibility slows down convergence which is in line with classical results in performative prediction. These results tells us that high sensitivity 

ε of the data distribution to changes in the predictive model implies slower convergence (Perdomo et al ., 2020). Under our model it can be shown that the distribution shift is ε ∝ ∥ Λβ ∥ sensitive in the predictions, see Appendix A.4. 

## 4.2 Homogenizing force of performativity 

Next, we look at how platform influence impacts opinions at equilibrium. We start from the fact that absent performativity, the Friedkin-Johnsen model is known to induce a heterogeneous equilibrium 

xxxFJ , whenever innate opinions xxx∗ are non-uniform. The following result explains the effect of the outer loop in our model, and how performativity acts as a homogenizing force. In the following result the variance of Var (xxxPS ) serves as a quantifier for opinion heterogeneity and the mean Mean (xxxPS ) describes aggregate trends in the population. 

Proposition 3 (Homogenizing force of performativity) . Consider a network characterized by a simple connected regular graph G, its nodes with peer susceptibilities αi ≡ α ∈ (0 , 1) and platform susceptibilities βi ≡ β ∈ (0 , 1) . The platform performs perfect prediction of past data. Then, the mean opinion at equilibrium is given by Mean( xxxPS ) = 1 

> n

111⊤xxx∗ and the variance satisfies 

∂Var( xxxPS )

∂β < 0.

The result is a direct consequence of the equilibrium characterization xxxPS = (1 −β)( In−βΨK )−1ΨKxxx∗

when α ∈ (0 , 1) , β < 1, together with the observation that ΨK is row-stochastic. Thus, for β = 0 the stable point corresponds to the opinions after K steps of peer interaction under the Friedkin-Johnsen model, i.e., xxxPS = FJ K (xxx∗). As platform susceptibility β grows the variance of equilibrium opinions decreases. Notably, the variance reduction can be as large as Var (xxx∗) for networks with small α. The mean, in turn, remains unaffected by platform interactions. 8Before we further characterize the resulting opinion distribution, let us comment on the case α = 1 

excluded by our result. Here we know that for K → ∞ the variance of opinions is zero, after the first instance of peer interaction (DeGroot, 1974). Interestingly, when α = 1 we have Var (xxxPS ) = 0 under platform influence, even for finite K. We refer to the formal result and a separate discussion of the DeGroot model in Appendix B. 

## 4.3 Consensus in the limit 

We have learned that the heterogeneity of equilibrium opinions gets reduced when β grows. Thus, a particularly interesting case is β → 1. In this case individuals are fully susceptible when interacting with the platform and platform influence is maximized. We show how, in combination with perfect prediction, this induces consensus at equilibrium. 

Theorem 1 (Consensus through performativity) . Consider a network characterized by a simple connected graph G, individuals with peer susceptibilities αi ∈ (0 , 1) ∀i, and a platform that performs perfect prediction of past data. Then, in the limit βi = β → 1 for all i,1 a consensus is reached at equilibrium. Namely, for any xxx∗ there exists a constant c∗ ∈ [0 , 1] such that: 

lim 

> β→1

(xxxPS )i = c∗ ∀i ∈ [n]. (7) Let us first contrast this result with the classical equilibrium under the Friedkin-Johnsen dynamics. The conventional understanding is that as long as xxx∗ is heterogeneous and αi < 1 for some i, the platform-free equilibrium leads to disagreement (Friedkin and Johnsen, 1990). However, with performativity this is different. Predictions repeatedly carry information from the past round into future interactions and, as a result, opinions move closer together over time. When βi = 1 for all i this results in a consensus at equilibrium even if the dynamics are initialized at a heterogeneous xxx∗. The reason is that performativity homogenizes opinions despite stubbornness by coupling instances of peer dynamics across time. Now, let us contrast the result with the equilibrium in the DeGroot model (DeGroot, 1974). DeGroot can explain consensus at equilibrium for heterogeneous xxx∗ by setting αi = 1 for all i and making the assumption that G is primitive. Theorem 1 can explain convergence to consensus for more general graphs. The reason is that anchoring of initial opinions in predictions stabilizes the dynamics without primitivity. 

# 5 Platform interaction creates pathways for peer influence 

Standard opinion dynamic models assume that peer influence travels along the edges of a graph and the network structure governs how opinions flow. Our next result shows that platforms can add an overlaying structure. In doing so it can create new pathways for peer influence, linking people who are not otherwise connected. We demonstrate how these alternate pathways for peer influence arise under a simple model of prediction with limited information. Formally, suppose the platform observes opinions for individuals in a connected subgraph, G′ = ( V′, E′), of G. To make prediction for unobserved individuals the platform then extrapolated these observations by using the mean opinion of the known individuals as a proxy. In other words, the platform follows the predictive policy below: 

(fff (t+1) )i =

((xxx(t)ex )i, for i ∈ V ′,

> 1
> |V ′|

P 

> j∈V ′

(xxx(t)ex )j , otherwise (8) This platform algorithm deviates from perfect prediction for unobserved individuals i / ∈ V ′. To determine their predictions it gives equal weight to each observed data point. This is a natural choice,    

> 1we can relax the homogeneity assumption on βwith an additional technical assumption on the speed at which the limit is attained for individual βi, see Appendix A.6.

9if no additional information about individuals is available. The following result shows how such a deviation from perfect prediction couples individuals, even if they are not susceptible to peer influence. 

Theorem 2 (Peer influence via platform) . Consider a network characterized by a simple connected graph G. Assume the platform has access to expressed opinions of individuals in a subgraph G′ = ( V′, E′)

of G and αi ∈ (0 , 1) for all i ∈ V ′. Consider innate opinions xxx∗ and ˜xxx∗ that differ in a single coordinate 

i ∈ V ′, and let xxxPS and ˜xxxPS be the corresponding stable points when platform predictions follow Equation (8). Fix q / ∈ V ′. Then, even if αq = 0 , as long as βq > 0, it holds that 

(xxxPS )q̸ = (˜ xxxPS )q .

The result explains that changes to the innate opinions of individual i impact the opinion of individual q even if αq = 0 . Thus, there can be indirect spillover effects through predictive models even if individuals are not susceptible to peer influence. This is an important deviation from classical network theory. In the meanwhile, V′ is not necessarily connected, while the platform adds another layer of connectivity among individuals in V′ via the platform-susceptible individuals in V/V′.A consequence of these indirect spillover effects is that a consensus can be achieved at equilibrium even in the presence of stubborn individuals. 

Proposition 4 (Consensus in the limit) . Under the assumption of Theorem 2 when βi = 1 for all i,the equilibrium xxxPS correspond to a consensus for any xxx∗.The difference to the result in Theorem 1 is that we do not require αi > 0 for every i. Instead, individuals for whom the platform derives predictions from alternate observations, can have peer susceptibility αi = 0 . Because rather than through direct peer influence, they get pulled towards the consensus opinion through predictions instead. 

# 6 Peer-platform dynamics amplify platform control 

The different ways in which opinions spread across the population through platform interaction and peer interaction has consequences for the equilibrium response to external shocks. In particular, systematic deviations from perfect prediction for a single individual impacts equilibrium opinions across the population in a way that is underestimated when considering peer dynamics in isolation, as our next result shows. Let us start with classical intuition from social networks. It tells us how node interventions propagate through the network along social connections. In that way changes to the initial opinion of individual 

j, naturally influences any individual l within the same connected component of the graph G during subsequent steps of peer interaction. In the same way, individual l can be influenced by platform recommendations given to individual i̸ = l, even if individual l itself is not susceptible to platform influence. What we show next is that the peer-platform co-evolution amplifies these effects. To make this concrete, consider a platform that deviates from perfect prediction for a single individual and determines predictions as follows: 

(fff (t+1) )i =

(

s for i = j

(xxx(t)ex )i otherwise . (9) In words, the platform repeatedly predicts s ∈ [0 , 1] for individual j and remains faithful to perfect prediction for all other individuals. We assume that individual j who is targeted by the platform has platform susceptibility βj > 0

and we are interested in the indirect platform influence on individual l̸ = j. To attribute the observed effect to spillovers we let βl = 0 . The next result quantifies changes to the equilibrium opinion due to the intervention and shows how it grows with the platform susceptibility of peers. For this result we let xxx∗ = 0 so that absent intervention we have xxxPS = 0 and any deviation from this consensus state can be attributed to the platform intervention s. We further fix βj and focus on the effect of repeated 10 0 5 10 15 20 25 30  

> Retraining step t
> 0.40
> 0.45
> 0.50
> 0.55
> 0.60
> 0.65
> Opinion after peer interaction,  x(t)
> ex
> Perfect
> OLS
> MLP
> Mean

(a) Opinions across retraining steps 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0  

> Platform susceptibility
> 0.000
> 0.002
> 0.004
> 0.006
> 0.008
> 0.010
> 0.012
> 0.014
> Var( xPS )
> Perfect

(b) Opinions at equilibrium 

Figure 2: In (a), we show how performativity homogenizes opinions across retraining steps. The x-axis denotes the retraining step t, and the y-axis corresponds to individuals’ expressed opinions in each times step, where the error bars indicate the variance. In (b), we show how platform susceptibility decreases variance of opinions at equilibrium. The x-axis denotes the varying homogeneous platform susceptibility while the y-axis denotes the variance of opinions in equilibrium. platform interactions on the equilibrium opinions. We use γ as a parameter to control the platform influence on individuals i / ∈ { j, l } exposed to perfect prediction. We refer to Appendix A.8 for a precise characterization of xxxPS .

Theorem 3 (Indirect platform influence) . Consider a network characterized by a simple fully-connected graph G, and peer susceptibilities αi ≡ α ∈ (0 , 1) . Let xxx∗ = 0 and consider a platform that nudges individual j towards s > 0 according to Equation (9) . Consider K = ∞. Let platform susceptibilities satisfy βi > 0 for i = j, βi = 0 for i = l, and βi = γ ∈ (0 , 1] for i / ∈ { j, l }. Then, the influence of s on individual l strictly grows with the platform susceptibility γ of their peers. In particular, it holds that 

∂∆γl

∂γ > 0 for ∆γl := ( xxxPS )l − (xxxPS )γ=0  

> l

.

Similarly, for the broader population we have 

∂Mean( xxxPS )

∂γ > 0.

To appreciate the result note that (xxxPS )γ=0  

> l

equals the opinion for individual l under the FJ dynamics initialized with xxxinit = sβ j ej . This corresponds to the classical network equilibrium under node intervention. Given the network topology each individual will equally be biased towards s during peer interactions and we have (xxxPS )γ=0  

> l

= sβ jeee⊤ 

> j

ΨKeeel > 0. Now, what Theorem 3 tells us is that the presence of a perfect predictor amplifies the indirect influence of the intervention s on the equilibrium opinions. The influence strictly grows with the platform susceptibility γ of peers in the population. As a consequence, classical models of peer interaction that treat platforms as static would offer only a conservative lower bound on the effect of platform actions on individuals. 

# 7 Experimental results 

To complement our study we conduct experiments using data of an online social network named Pokec. 2 This dataset contains anonymized profile data for over 1.6 million individuals in different modalities together with an underlying social network graph. For our simulations we sample a connected component of 2,163 nodes which we treat as an undirected graph.  

> 2The dataset can be downloaded from https://snap.stanford.edu/data/soc-Pokec.html

11 0 5 10 15 20 25 30      

> Retraining step t
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> Opinion ( x(t)
> ex )q
> OLS x*
> OLS x*

(a) Evolving opinion of stubborn individual 0 5 10 15 20 25 30         

> Retraining step t
> 0.60
> 0.65
> 0.70
> 0.75
> 0.80
> Opinion ( x(t)
> ex )l
> (x(T)
> ex )l(Perfect,
> k= 0, k{l}S)
> Perfect
> OLS
> MLP
> Mean

(b) Indirect effect of platform intervention. 

Figure 3: In (a), we show how a stubborn individual q ∈ U with αq = 0 and x∗ 

> q

= 0 is influenced by their peers across retraining steps for two different scenarios. In (b), we show how indirect platform influence increases over retraining steps. We compare different the opinion of the stubborn individual l

with βl = 0 . The purple dashed line denotes the opinion of the stubborn individual if we set βk = 0 ,

k / ∈ { l} ∪ S.To mimic a machine learning setting we extract node features from the available profile information using a transformer model. We choose “relation _ to _ smoking” as the target of prediction. This field contains free form text from which we extract a sentiment scores as a proxy for individuals’ opinion towards smoking. We simulate retraining and the dynamics over the network graph (Algorithm 1), treating the opinion extracted from the data as the individuals’ innate opinions. For the platform’s learning algorithm we contrast perfect prediction (Perfect) with a) mean estimation (Mean), b) Ordinary Least Square (OLS) with predictions clipped to [0 , 1] , and c) a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP). If not stated otherwise, we use the following settings for simulations. We use K = 100 to approximate convergence of the inner loop dynamics in Algorithm 1. We perform T = 30 steps of retraining after which the dynamics approximately reached performative stability. We use a heterogeneous setup where we sample {βi}i∈[n] and {1 − αi}i∈[n] from a normal distribution with mean 0.9 and standard deviation 0.1, and the resulting values are clipped within [0 .01 , 0.99] . We assume opinions of 80% of the nodes are observed and use it as the training dataset to predict the opinions of the remaining 20% population, and we denote these two sets of individuals as O and U respectively. All the simulations are conducted on a commodity hardware using Python 3.13. The codes for the plots can be accessed via our repository. 

Homogenizing force of performativity. We first investigate how opinions evolve across retraining steps for the different learning settings. In Figure 2a, we plot the mean and variance of opinions xxx(t)ex 

across retraining steps. We see that for all four predictive strategies, the variance decreases compared to both, the innate opinions (t = 0) , and the FJ equilibrium (t = 1) . The variance approximately converges to 0 as t increases. This observation shows that our intuition of performativity acting as a homogenizing force in networks, extends form perfect predictions to parametric predictions (OLS, MLP) not covered by our theory. 

Equilibrium variation with peer and platform susceptibility. In the characterization of the dependence of mean and variance of the equilibrium (Proposition 3), we adopt the assumption of regular networks and homogeneous susceptibilities. We use the closed-form expression of xxxPS with K = 100 ,

T = ∞ under the perfect predictions. Our simulations in Figure 2b show this result also extends to a real-world network, which is not regular. We use homogeneous platform susceptibilities, βi ≡ β, and vary them while holding the peer susceptibilities fixed. Figure 2 implies the variance is negatively correlated with the platform susceptibility. Further simulations showing a negative correlation of the variance with peer susceptibility are provided in Appendix D. 

Platform interactions creates peer influence. As in Theorem 2, we randomly sample an individual 

q ∈ U in the population and set αq = 0 . We then randomly select 10% of individuals in O and set their 12 innate opinions to 1, and we denote this new innate opinions as ˜xxx∗. With the new innate opinions ˜xxx∗,we observe how the opinion (xxx(t)ex )q converge to an equilibrium different from the equilibrium opinion under the original innate opinions xxx∗. We use the OLS predictions to visualize this in Figure 3a, which shows how predictions offer an alternate pathway for peer influence, beyond mean estimation. Empirical results of mean estimation and MLP are deferred to Appendix D. 

Peer interactions amplify platform influence. We illustrate the indirect effect of platform interventions on individuals who are not susceptible to platform influence. We extends Theorem 3 using simulations on the Pokec network, which is not fully connected. We also adopted the same set of heterogeneous peer susceptibilities and innate opinions xxx∗ as in producing Figure 3b. We randomly choose an individual l and set βl = 0 . We also randomly choose 10% of individuals of the network and steer them towards s = 1 . We denote this set of individuals as S. In Figure 3b, we observe the opinion of stubborn individual l increasingly deviates from x∗ 

> l

and (xxx(1) ex )l as retraining steps t increase. The purple dashed line shows the setting where βi = 0 for individuals who are not steered, i.e., i / ∈ S, this corresponds to the outcomes after a single instance of peer interactions. We see how opinions deviate from this state through repeated peer-platform interactions. Notably, this behavior is observed also beyond perfect prediction as studied in Theorem 3. 

# 8 Discussion 

We demonstrated that the presence of a performative learning system can qualitatively alter equilibria in social networks. We identify two key mechanisms that lead to divergent behavior. First, learning systems introduce memory into peer dynamics by deriving future predictions from past observations, thereby coupling opinions across time. Second, learning systems create new pathways for peer influence beyond the topology of social networks by repeatedly aggregating data across a population and distilling it into personalized predictions. Using a minimal model, we provide intuition for how these mechanisms interact with peer dynamics and alter equilibrium outcomes. While the number of unexplored questions at the intersection of performative prediction and network science, ranging from empirical studies to theoretical understanding, is vast, there several natural extensions of our model that we would like to discuss here. In our model we abstract learning systems as non-parametric predictors that have access to perfect measurements of opinions. Extending the study to incorporate measurement uncertainty, stochasticity, or limited information, as well as parametric prediction functions would illuminate other practical dimensions of performative effects. Our simulations suggest that many of the qualitative findings hold beyond perfect prediction. Further, we assume that performative effects are self-fulfilling, and leave the network topology, as well as peer susceptibilities untouched. However, related work suggests that platforms can also change characteristics of the network (Zhou et al . , 2024; Chitra and Musco, 2019, e.g.,). It would be interesting to investigate how such alternate assumptions of platform influence interplay with repeated retraining. In that context, interventions at the level of susceptibilities (Abebe et al . , 2018) would also be interesting to study. Similarly, our results suggest that peer dynamics can amplify platform effects. Rethinking established influence maximization results while keeping this co-evolution in mind might help develop alternative explanations for reconciling empirical findings with theoretical models. More broadly, the need to understand how digital platforms reshape our society is not only scientific but also regulatory. The Digital Services Act calls for greater transparency (OECD, 2025): “[...] to shed light on how the algorithms and processes deployed by these platforms influence the way information flows in our society, and influence individual platform users” The effect of platforms over users is also a central concern in digital antitrust (Stigler Committee, 2019). Linking our insights to measures of performative power (Hardt et al . , 2022; Mendler-Dünner et al . , 2024) could help support future investigations into the economic power of digital platforms. In particular, our results suggest that standard causal designs might underestimate the performative power of digital platforms. Thus, gathering valid empirical estimates of platform effects would be an important next step. 13 Acknowledgements 

Rediet Abebe and Celestine Mendler Dünner acknowledge the financial support of the Hector Foundation. Abebe was supported by the Andrew Carnegie Fellowship Program. Jiduan Wu would like to thank for the financial support from the Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems (CLS). We would like to thank Ana-Andreea Stoica and anonymous reviewers for helpful feedback on the manuscript. 

# References 

Rediet Abebe, Jon Kleinberg, David Parkes, and Charalampos E. Tsourakakis. 2018. Opinion Dynamics with Varying Susceptibility to Persuasion. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining (KDD ’18) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1089–1098. Gediminas Adomavicius, Jesse C Bockstedt, Shawn P Curley, and Jingjing Zhang. 2013. Do recommender systems manipulate consumer preferences? A study of anchoring effects. Information Systems Research 

24, 4 (2013), 956–975. Michael Anderson and Jeremy Magruder. 2012. Learning from the Crowd: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of the Effects of an Online Review Database. The Economic Journal 122, 563 (2012), 957–989. Christopher A. Bail, Lisa P. Argyle, Taylor W. Brown, John P. Bumpus, Haohan Chen, M. B. Fallin Hunzaker, Jaemin Lee, Marcus Mann, Friedolin Merhout, and Alexander Volfovsky. 2018. Exposure to opposing views on social media can increase political polarization. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115, 37 (2018), 9216–9221. Abraham Berman and Robert J Plemmons. 1994. Nonnegative matrices in the mathematical sciences .SIAM. Gary Cheng, Moritz Hardt, and Celestine Mendler-Dünner. 2024. Causal Inference out of Control: Es-timating Performativity without Treatment Randomization. In International Conference on Machine Learning . 8077–8103. Uthsav Chitra and Christopher Musco. 2019. Understanding filter bubbles and polarization in social networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08772 (2019). Matteo Cinelli, Gianmarco De Francisci Morales, Alessandro Galeazzi, Walter Quattrociocchi, and Michele Starnini. 2021. The echo chamber effect on social media. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 118, 9 (2021), e2023301118. Morris H DeGroot. 1974. Reaching a consensus. Journal of the American Statistical association 69, 345 (1974), 118–121. Michela Del Vicario, Alessandro Bessi, Fabiana Zollo, Fabio Petroni, Antonio Scala, Guido Caldarelli, H Eugene Stanley, and Walter Quattrociocchi. 2016. The spreading of misinformation online. 

Proceedings of the national academy of Sciences 113, 3 (2016), 554–559. Dmitriy Drusvyatskiy and Lin Xiao. 2023. Stochastic Optimization with Decision-Dependent Distribu-tions. Mathematics of Operations Research 48, 2 (2023), 954–998. Gabriele Farina and Juan Carlos Perdomo. 2026. The Stability of Online Algorithms in Performative Prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.24207 (2026). Noah E Friedkin, Peng Jia, and Francesco Bullo. 2016. A theory of the evolution of social power: Natural trajectories of interpersonal influence systems along issue sequences. Sociological Science 3(2016), 444–472. Noah E Friedkin and Eugene C Johnsen. 1990. Social influence and opinions. Journal of mathematical sociology 15, 3-4 (1990), 193–206. 14 Noah E. Friedkin and Eugene C. Johnsen. 1999. Social Influence Networks and Opinion Change. In 

Advances in Group Processes . Vol. 16. Emerald, 1–29. Germain Gauthier, Roland Hodler, Philine Widmer, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. 2026. The political effects of X’s feed algorithm. Nature (2026), 1–8. Moritz Hardt, Meena Jagadeesan, and Celestine Mendler-Dünner. 2022. Performative power. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , Vol. 35. 22969–22981. Moritz Hardt, Nimrod Megiddo, Christos Papadimitriou, and Mary Wootters. 2016. Strategic Classifi-cation. In ACM Conference on Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science . 111–122. Moritz Hardt and Celestine Mendler-Dünner. 2025. Performative Prediction: Past and Future. Statist. Sci. 40, 3 (2025), 417–436. Richard A Holley and Thomas M Liggett. 1975. Ergodic theorems for weakly interacting infinite systems and the voter model. The annals of probability (1975), 643–663. Ferenc Huszár, Sofia Ira Ktena, Conor O’Brien, Luca Belli, Andrew Schlaikjer, and Moritz Hardt. 2022. Algorithmic amplification of politics on Twitter. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 119, 1 (2022), e2025334119. Zachary Izzo, Lexing Ying, and James Zou. 2021. How to Learn when Data Reacts to Your Model: Performative Gradient Descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning , Vol. 139. PMLR, 4641–4650. Meena Jagadeesan, Celestine Mendler-Dünner, and Moritz Hardt. 2021. Alternative Microfoundations for Strategic Classification. In International Conference on Machine Learning , Vol. 139. PMLR, 4687–4697. Peng Jia, Noah E Friedkin, and Francesco Bullo. 2019. Opinion dynamics and social power evolution: A single–timescale model. IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems 7, 2 (2019), 899–911. Peng Jia, Anahita MirTabatabaei, Noah E Friedkin, and Francesco Bullo. 2015. Opinion dynamics and the evolution of social power in influence networks. SIAM review 57, 3 (2015), 367–397. Wenjun Mei, Francesco Bullo, Ge Chen, Julien M. Hendrickx, and Florian Dörfler. 2022. Micro-foundation of opinion dynamics: Rich consequences of the weighted-median mechanism. Phys. Rev. Res. 4 (2022), 023213. Issue 2. Celestine Mendler-Dünner, Gabriele Carovano, and Moritz Hardt. 2024. An engine not a camera: Measuring performative power of online search. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Celestine Mendler-Dünner, Frances Ding, and Yixin Wang. 2022. Anticipating Performativity by Predicting from Predictions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Article 2260. Celestine Mendler-Dünner, Juan Perdomo, Tijana Zrnic, and Moritz Hardt. 2020. Stochastic Optimiza-tion for Performative Prediction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , Vol. 33. 4929–4939. John P Miller, Juan C Perdomo, and Tijana Zrnic. 2021. Outside the echo chamber: Optimizing the performative risk. In International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 7710–7720. Mehrnaz Mofakhami, Ioannis Mitliagkas, and Gauthier Gidel. 2023. Performative Prediction with Neural Networks. In Proceedings of The 26th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 206) . PMLR, 11079–11093. Adhyyan Narang, Evan Faulkner, Dmitriy Drusvyatskiy, Maryam Fazel, and Lillian J. Ratliff. 2023. Multiplayer Performative Prediction: Learning in Decision-Dependent Games. Journal of Machine Learning Research 24, 202 (2023), 1–56. 15 Sridhar Narayanan and Kirthi Kalyanam. 2015. Position Effects in Search Advertising and their Moderators: A Regression Discontinuity Approach. Marketing Science 34, 3 (May 2015), 388–407. OECD. 2025. Social Media Governance Policy Brief: How the DSA can enable a public science of digital platform social impacts. https://oecd.ai/en/wonk/documents/social-media-governanc e-policy-brief-how-the-dsa-can-enable-a-public-science-of-digital-platform-socia l-impacts-policy-brief .Eli Pariser. 2011. The filter bubble: How the new personalized web is changing what we read and how we think . Penguin. Sergey E Parsegov, Anton V Proskurnikov, Roberto Tempo, and Noah E Friedkin. 2016. Novel multidimensional models of opinion dynamics in social networks. IEEE Trans. Automat. Control 62, 5 (2016), 2270–2285. Antonio F Peralta, János Kertész, and Gerardo Iñiguez. 2025. Opinion dynamics in social networks: From models to data. In Handbook of Computational Social Science . Edward Elgar Publishing Limited, 384–406. Juan C. Perdomo, Tijana Zrnic, Celestine Mendler-Dünner, and Moritz Hardt. 2020. Performative Prediction. In International Conference on Machine Learning , Vol. 119. PMLR, 7599–7609. Nicola Perra and Luis EC Rocha. 2019. Modelling opinion dynamics in the age of algorithmic personalisation. Scientific reports 9, 1 (2019), 7261. Niccolo Pescetelli, Daniel Barkoczi, and Manuel Cebrian. 2022. Bots influence opinion dynamics without direct human-bot interaction: the mediating role of recommender systems. Applied Network Science 

7, 1 (2022), 46. Anton V Proskurnikov and Roberto Tempo. 2017. A tutorial on modeling and analysis of dynamic social networks. Part I. Annual Reviews in Control 43 (2017), 65–79. Hegselmann Rainer and Ulrich Krause. 2002. Opinion Dynamics and Bounded Confidence: Models, Analysis and Simulation. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 5, 3 (2002). Eden Saig and Nir Rosenfeld. 2025. Evolutionary Prediction Games. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Fernando P. Santos, Yphtach Lelkes, and Simon A. Levin. 2021. Link recommendation algorithms and dynamics of polarization in online social networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 

118, 50 (2021), e2102141118. Eugene Seneta. 2006. Non-negative matrices and Markov chains . Springer Science & Business Media. Stigler Committee. 2019. Final Report: Stigler Committee on Digital Platforms. Raluca M. Ursu. 2018. The Power of Rankings: Quantifying the Effect of Rankings on Online Consumer Search and Purchase Decisions. Marketing Science 37, 4 (August 2018), 530–552. Xiaolu Wang, Chung-Yiu Yau, and Hoi To Wai. 2023. Network effects in performative prediction games. In International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 36514–36540. Yanbang Wang and Jon Kleinberg. 2023. On the relationship between relevance and conflict in online social link recommendations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023), 36708–36725. Zifan Wang, Changxin Liu, Thomas Parisini, Michael M Zavlanos, and Karl H Johansson. 2025. Constrained optimization with decision-dependent distributions. IEEE Trans. Automat. Control 

(2025). Ercan Yildiz, Asuman Ozdaglar, Daron Acemoglu, Amin Saberi, and Anna Scaglione. 2013. Binary opinion dynamics with stubborn agents. ACM Transactions on Economics and Computation (TEAC) 

1, 4 (2013), 1–30. 16 Tianyi Zhou, Stefan Neumann, Kiran Garimella, and Aristides Gionis. 2024. Modeling the impact of timeline algorithms on opinion dynamics using low-rank updates. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024 . 2694–2702. 17 A Proofs 

Throughout the appendix, we say A ⪯ B for two arbitrary symmetric matrices A, B , if B − A is positive semi-definite. The notation 000, 111 denotes a matrix or vector of appropriate size with all 0 or 1 entries respectively, and I denotes the identity matrix. 

## A.1 Auxiliary results 

Lemma 1. (Primitive matrices) Let M ∈ Rn×n be irreducible and non-negative. Further let D ∈ Rn×n

be a diagonal matrix with non-negative diagonal entries and at least one positive entry. Then, the sum of the two matrices M + D is primitive. 

Proof. Suppose for i0 ∈ [n], Di0,i 0 > 0. The proof is immediate by noticing that the matrix M + D is irreducible and aperiodic by adding a self-loop. 

Lemma 2. Let M ∈ Rn×n be an arbitrary primitive and row-stochastic matrix, then the sequence of matrices {M t}t∈N converges as follows 

lim  

> t→+∞

M t = 1yyy⊤.

where yyy is the eigenvector of M ⊤ with respect to eigenvalue 1 and Pni=1 yi = 1 .

Proof. The result is a corollary of the Perron-Frobenius theorem and Theorem 1.2 in Seneta (2006). From Seneta (2006) we have 

M t = 1 11yyy⊤ + O(|λ2|t)

where {λi}ei=1 are eigenvalues of M such that λ1 = 1 > |λ2| ≥ | λ3| ≥ · · · ≥ | λe|. Thus, the second term vanishes as t → ∞ .

## A.2 Proof of Proposition 1 

Proof. To characterize the equilibrium under repeated perfect prediction we note that 

xxx(t+1) ex = Ψ Kxxx(t)init 

= Ψ K (( In − Λβ )xxx∗ + Λ βfff (t))= Ψ K (( In − Λβ )xxx∗ + Λ βxxx(t)ex ), t ≥ 0. (10) From this recursion we can see that for proving the existence of a stable point we need to be able to control lim t→∞ (Ψ K Λβ )t.Applying Corollary 1 in Parsegov et al . (2016), we know Ψ∞ is well-defined. Further, for any 

K ∈ {∞} ∪ N the matrix ΨK is row-stochastic by observing 

ΨK111 = 

"K−1X

> i=0

(Λ αW )i(In − Λα) + (Λ αW )K

#

111= (Λ αW )K−1Λα1 + (Λ αW )K−1(In − Λα)1

+

> K−2

X

> j=0

(Λ αW )j (In − Λα)1 11= (Λ αW )K−2Λα111 + 

> K−2

X

> j=0

(Λ αW )j (In − Λα)1 11= · · · = 1 11, K < ∞,

18 because W is row-stochastic. For K = ∞ we have Ψ∞ = lim k→∞ Ψk and hence Ψ∞ is also row-stochastic. Perron-Frobenius theorem implies ρ(Ψ K ) ≤ 1.Now, we take a detour and observe, under permutation of the node indices, ΨK can be decomposed as follows 

ΨK =

 In′ 000(Ψ K )21 (Ψ K )22 



where n′ = |{ i : i ∈ [n], α i = 0 }| denotes the number of individuals who are fully stubborn towards their peers. With this decomposition, we’ll show the existence of xxxPS by proving lim t→∞ (Ψ ∞)t exists first. 

• When n′ > 0, if ρ((Ψ K )22 ) < 1 the proof is immediate, and it remains to discuss ρ((Ψ K )22 ) = 1 .Here, we apply Lemma 2 in Parsegov et al . (2016) to (Ψ K )22 , and under node permutation, we have, 

(Ψ K )22 =

((Ψ K )22 )11 ((Ψ K )22 )12 

000 ((Ψ K )22 )22 



where block ((Ψ K )22 )11 contains indices P := {i : i ∈ [n]/[n′], ∃j ∈ [n′] : (Ψ K )ij > 0}, i.e., nodes that are directly connected to completely stubborn nodes [n′]. Since Pnj=n′+1 (((Ψ K )22 )11 )ij < 1,

∀i ∈ P we know that ρ(((Ψ K )22 )11 ) < 1 and ((Ψ K )22 )22 is row-stochastic. However, note G is connected and thus a node is either completely stubborn or connected to such a node. We conclude 

(Ψ K )22 = ((Ψ K )22 )11 and hence ρ((Ψ K )22 ) = ρ(((Ψ K )22 )11 ) < 1. The limit lim t→∞ (Ψ K )t hence exists and corresponds to 

lim 

> t→∞

(Ψ K )t =

 In′ 000(In−n′ − (Ψ K )22 )−1Ψ21 000



.

• When n′ = 0 , we know that ΨK is well-defined, as Λα̸ = In. For K < ∞, we expand the recursion and have ΨK = In − Λα + (Λ αW )K + . . . , which shows it is connected and aperiodic, and hence primitive. When K = ∞, we can write Ψ∞ = P∞

> i=0

(Λ αW )i(In − Λα) in the following form under node permutation 

Ψ∞ =

(Ψ ∞)11 000(Ψ ∞)21 000



where (Ψ ∞)11 is positive and row-stochastic, and this block corresponds to nodes with αi < 1.Observe 

lim 

> t→∞

(Ψ ∞)t =

 lim t→∞ ((Ψ ∞)11 )t 000(Ψ ∞)21 lim t→∞ ((Ψ ∞)11 )t 000



.

where lim t→∞ ((Ψ ∞)11 )t exists since (Ψ ∞)11 is primitive. We conclude that lim t→∞ (Ψ K )t exists for any Λα̸ = In. Hence it follows that for any 000 ≤ Λβ ≤ IIIn,

lim t→∞ (Ψ K Λβ )t exists. Further, given the assumption that 000 ≤ Λβ ≤ In with Λβ̸ = In, we have 

ρ(Ψ K Λβ ) ≤ ρ(Ψ K ) = 1 since ΨK Λβ ≤ ΨK by applying a corollary of Perron-Frobenius theorem (Corollary 1.5.(a) in Berman and Plemmons (1994)). Building on these results, we can now characterize the stable point. If ρ(Ψ K Λβ ) < 1, the dynamics in (10) are Schur stable and the convergence is immediate. We have 

xxxPS = ( In − ΨK Λβ )−1ΨK (In − Λβ )xxx∗.

Now we discuss the case when ρ(Ψ K Λβ ) = 1 . Apply Lemma 2 in Parsegov et al . (2016), we know for row-substochastic matrix ΨK Λβ , under node permutation, it can be decomposed into an upper triangular form 

ΨK Λβ =

(Ψ K Λβ )11 (Ψ K Λβ )12 

000 (Ψ K Λβ )22 



19 where (Ψ K Λβ )11 is Schur stable and (Ψ K Λβ )22 is row-stochastic. Note ΨK is row-stochastic and 

0 ≤ βi ≤ 1 ∀i ∈ [n]. Then for any node i in row-stochastic matrix (Ψ K Λβ )22 ,

1 = X

> j

(Ψ K )ij βj ≤ 1.

The equality holds only when for any node j in row-stochastic matrix (Ψ K Λβ )22 , βj = 1 . Hence 

(Ψ K Λβ )22 = (Ψ K )22 . Let Ψ∗ 

> 22

:= lim t→∞ (Ψ 22 )t that exists since we’ve proved the existence of 

lim t→∞ (Ψ K )t. The equilibrium is cahracterized as follows 

xxxPS =

(I − (Ψ K Λβ )11 )−1 000000 I

  (Ψ K )11 − (Ψ K Λβ )11 (Ψ K )12 Ψ∗

> 22

000 Ψ∗

> 22



xxx∗. (11) In particular, when Λβ = In, the block (Ψ K Λ) 11 is empty, and we have xxxPS = lim t→∞ ΨtK . We proved earlier that this limit exists when Λα̸ = In.Now, we prove that the inverse, (In − ΨK Λβ )−1, in the equilibrimu characterization (11) is well-defined when αi > 0 ∀i ∈ [n], Λα̸ = In, and Λβ̸ = In. We apply a corollary of Perron-Frobenius theorem (Corollary 1.5.(b) in Berman and Plemmons (1994)) and notice that ΨK Λβ ≤ ΨK , ΨK Λβ̸ = Ψ K , and 

ΨK + Ψ K Λβ is irreducible since αi > 0 ∀i ∈ [n]. Hence ρ(ΨΛ β ) < 1 and we have 

xxxPS = ( In − ΨK Λβ )−1ΨK (In − Λβ )xxx∗. (12) 

## A.3 Proof of Proposition 2 

Proof. For non-negative matrices, we apply a corollary from Perron-Frobenius theorem (Corollary 1.5.(b) in Berman and Plemmons (1994)): If 000 ≤ A ≤ B, then ρ(A) ≤ ρ(B). Observe 

000 ≤ ΨK ≤ max  

> k

βkΨK ,ρ(Ψ K Λβ ) ≤ ρ(max  

> k

βkΨΨΨK ) = max  

> k

βkρ(Ψ K ) = max  

> k

βk < 1.

As for the case when some βi = 1 , the convergence rate and choice of c is immediate from the proof of Proposition 1. 

## A.4 Proof of distribution sensitivity 

Proof. Set fff (t) to fff (t)1 , f ff (t)2 respectively, and let fff (t+1) 1 , f ff (t+1) 2 be the corresponding predictions at 

t + 1 . We have ∥fff (t+1) 1 − fff (t+1) 2 ∥ = ∥ΨK Λβ (fff (t)1 − fff (t)2 )∥ ≤ ∥ Λβ ∥∥ ΨK ∥∥ fff (t)1 − fff (t)2 ∥ where ∥Λβ ∥∥ ΨK ∥

corresponds to the sensitivity parameter in Perdomo et al. (2020). 

## A.5 Proof of Proposition 3 

To study the relationship between variance and susceptibilities we build on the following intermediate result decomposing the equilibrium into a consensus component and a sum of heterogeneous components. 

Proposition 5 (Decomposition of equilibrium) . Consider a network characterized by a regular, simple, and connected graph G, its nodes with peer susceptibilities αi ≡ α ∈ (0 , 1) , platform susceptibilities 

βi ≡ β ∈ [0 , 1] , and a platform that enforces perfect predictions based on policy (5) . Suppose K = ∞

and FJ dynamics converges. Then, the equilibrium xxxPS can be decomposed as follows 

xxxPS = 111⊤yyyn(1 − β)111 + 

> n

X

> i=2

λivvv⊤ 

> i

yyy

1 − βλ i

vvvi, (13) where yyy = (1 −β)xxx∗ and (λi, v vvi) are eigenvalues and corresponding eigenvectors of Ψ∞ with vvvi ⊥ 111 ∀i ≥ 2.20 Proof of Proposition 5. We work with the explicit expression of xxxPS in (12) where 

ΨK := 

> K−1

X

> i=0

(Λ αW )i(In − Λα) + (Λ αW )K .

Let us first focus on the matrix W . The matrix is symmetric and we apply the Schur decomposition 

W = U ΛU ⊤ with Λ = diag (μ1, · · · , μ n) and U := [ vvv1, · · · , v vvn] where {μi vvvi}i∈[n] denote the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of W . By definition we have U ⊤U = U U ⊤ = In. Further, since W is row-stochastic, apply Gershgorin circle theorem, we have ρ(W ) = 1 . Apply Perron-Frobenius theorem on irreducible matrix W , w.l.o.g., let μ1 = 1 and vvv1 = 1√n 111⊤ and μi̸ = 1 and |μi| ≤ 1 ∀i ≥ 2. Using this expression in the characterization of stability, we obtain Ψ∞ = U diag( λ1, · · · , λ n)U ⊤ with λi := 1−α 

> 1−αμ i

, and hence 

xxxPS = U diag 

 λ1

1 − βλ 1

, · · · , λn

1 − βλ n



U ⊤.

We can easily verify that λ1 = 1 , and 0 < λ i < 1 ∀i ≥ 2 by noticing μi̸ = 1 , |μi| ≤ 1 for ∀i ≥ 2, and 

1 − αμ i − 1 + α = α(1 − μi) > 0. This concludes the proof of Proposition 5. Before we move to the proof of Proposition 3 let us comment on this result. The characterization applies to regular networks and homogeneous parameters. It shows that the equilibrium has an invariant consensus component 111√n and its coefficient 11−β is invariant with respect to the choice of Λα and G.The other components characterize the heterogeneity of opinion dynamics in different directions. The more the heterogeneous components vvvi, i ≥ 2 are aligned with the invariant component (1 − β)xxx∗ and the larger the eigenvalue λi, the more vvvi will contribute to the equilibrium. While we notice that the consensus component “dominates” in the sense that 

0 < λi

1 − βλ i

< 11 − β , ∀i. 

Next we build on this decomposition to prove Proposition 3. 

Proof of Proposition 3. Note vvvi ⊥ 111 ∀i ≥ 2,

¯xxxPS = (1 − β)1 11⊤ Pni=1  

> λi
> 1−βλ i

vvvivvv⊤ 

> i

xxx∗

n

= 111⊤xxx∗

n .

As for the variance of opinions, we have 

Var( xxxPS ) = 

> n

X

> i=1

λi

1 − βλ i

vvv⊤ 

> i

((1 − β)xxx∗)vvvi − ¯xxxPS 

> 2

=

> n

X

> i=2

λi

1 − β(1 − η)λi

vvv⊤ 

> i

((1 − β)xxx∗)vvvi

> 2

=

> n

X

> i=2

 λi

1 − βλ i

vvv⊤ 

> i

((1 − β)xxx∗)

2

.

As for the relationship between platform susceptibility β and Var( xxxPS ), we have 

∂Var( xxxPS )

∂β =

> n

X

> i=2

2λ2 

> i

(1 − β)( λi − 1)( vvv⊤ 

> i

xxx∗)2

(1 − βλ i)3 < 0.

21 Similarly we can also show that under the conditions of Proposition 3 the variance decreases as α

grows. We omit this result form the main body as it follows from classical insights in peer dynamics. Namely, via basic calculations, we have 

∂

 λi

> 1−βλ i

2

∂α = −λi(1 − μi)(1 − βλ i)3(1 − αμ i)2 < 0 i ≥ 2

and hence if there exists i0 ≥ 2 such that vvv⊤ 

> i0

xxx∗̸ = 0 , the larger α is, the larger Var (xxxPS ) is. Also, note 

Var( xxx∗) = Pni=2 (vvv⊤ 

> i

xxx∗)2, hence Var( xxxPS ) is also implicitly determined by Var( xxx∗). It follows that 

∂Var( xxxPS )

∂α < 0.

## A.6 Proof of Theorem 1 

Next we show consensus in the limit βi → 1 ∀i. We proof the claim without the homogeneity assumption on β. Instead assume the weaker numerical condition on how the limit is attained for different individuals: All we assume is that the limit lim βi,β j →1 1−βi 

> 1−βj

exists. 

Proof. To prove Theorem 1 we first show that ΨK is primitive under the conditions of the theorem. We have 

Ψ1 = ( In − Λα) + Λ αW

ΨK = Λ αW (In − Λα) + ( In − Λα) + 

> K−1

X

> i=2

(Λ αW )i(In − Λα) + (Λ αW )K , K ≥ 2.

We note that ΛαW (In − Λα) is irreducible given that αi ∈ (0 , 1) for ∀i ∈ [n].3 By Lemma 1, we know that ΨK is primitive for any K ∈ { N ∪ ∞} .From the equilibrium characterization in Equation (12) , we have that for Λβ = 111 it holds that 

xxxPS = lim t→∞ ΨtKxxx∗. Hence, we get convergence to 

c∗ = yyyf ff (0) = yyy⊤xxx∗

where yyy is the eigenvector of (Ψ K )⊤ and satisfies 111⊤yyy = 1 .It remains to show that in the limit Λβ → 111 this behavior is maintained. Thus, for any sequence 

Λβ → 111, we choose ϵ > 0 and an arbitrary c > 1 such that ϵc ⪯ In − Λβ ⪯ ϵI n

> ∞

X

> m=0

(Ψ K (In − ϵI n)) m ϵc

!

> ij

≤

> ∞

X

> m=0

(Ψ K Λβ )m(In − Λβ )

!

> ij

≤

> ∞

X

> m=0

(Ψ K (In − ϵc In)) mϵ

!

> ij

where the inequality holds since Ψ is non-negative and In − Λβ is diagonal with positive entries. Under the assumption that lim i,j 1−βi 

> 1−βj

exists, let ϵ → 0 and apply the theorem from Friedkin and Johnsen (1990), we get 

 1

c lim 

> m→∞

(Ψ K )m



> ij

≤ lim 

> β→111
> ∞

X

> m=0

(Ψ K Λβ )m(In − Λβ )

!

> ij

≤



c lim 

> m→∞

(Ψ K )m

> ij

.       

> 3A side note is that for K < ∞,ΨKis primitive with a weaker assumption that Λα̸=In.

22 Since c > 1 can be chosen arbitrarily, apply equilibrium (12) we have 

lim  

> Λβ→111

(In − ΨK Λβ )−1(In − Λβ ) = lim 

> j→∞

(Ψ K )j .

Apply Corollary 2, opinions reach consensus as follows 

lim   

> Λβ→111

xxxPS = 1 11⊤yyy lim  

> Λβ→111

(In − Λβ )−1ΨK (In − Λβ )xxx∗.

## A.7 Proof of Theorem 2 

Proof. Throughout this section, let n′ := |V ′| and define 

Λβ, 1 := (Λ β )1: n′,1: n′ Λβ, 2 := (Λ β )n′+1: n,n ′+1: n,xxx′ 

> PS

:= ( xxxPS )1: n′ Ψ′ 

> K

:= (Ψ K )1: n′,1: n′ .

Without loss of generality we can rewrite the predictions as follows, 

fff (t+1) = Mx xx(t)ex , M := 

 In′ 000n′×(n−n′)1 

> n′

111(n−n′)×n′ 000(n−n′)×(n−n′)



.

Hence we have 

xxx(t+1) ex = Ψ K (( In − Λβ )xxx∗ + Λ β Mx xx(t)ex ).

We look at ΨK Λβ M in a block-wise way, 

ΨK Λβ M =

(Ψ K Λβ M )1: n′,1: n′ 000n′×(n−n′)

∗ 000(n−n′)×(n−n′)



,

When Λβ = In, we have 

xxx(t)ex = (Ψ K M )txxx(0) ex .

It is easy to verify that ΨK M is still a row-stochastic matrix and 

ΨK M =

(Ψ K M )1: n′,1: n′ 000n′×(n−n′)

∗ 000(n−n′)×(n−n′)



,

(Ψ K M )t =

((Ψ K M )1: n′,1: n′ )t 000n′×(n−n′)

∗ 000(n−n′)×(n−n′)



The primitivity of the block (Ψ K M )1: n′,1: n′ comes from an observation: We assume a virtual node 

n + 1 assigned with the opinions of V′, which represents the union of V\V ′. From each node in V′,there’s a directed edge to node n + 1 . While the node n + 1 is connected with some of nodes in V′

with edges starting at n + 1 because of the connectivity assumption. Hence for any pair of node in V′,there is a path between them, the primitivity is immediate by noticing (Ψ K )ii > 0 for i ∈ [n]. Hence opinions in V′ will converge to consensus using the same proof as Theorem 1. As the platform is using the mean predictor, we conclude that the whole population will converge to consensus as t → ∞ .We observe that the consensus opinion c′ is influenced by nodes in V′ and no assumption about 

αj , j ∈ V /V′, is needed. And when xxx∗ differs from ˜xxx∗ in some i ∈ V ′, the consensus also differs since 

lim t→∞ ((Ψ K M )1: n′,1: n′ )t is a positive matrix. Since lim t→∞ ((Ψ K M )1: n′,1: n′ )t exists, we know lim t→∞ ((Ψ K Λβ M )1: n′,1: n′ )t also exists and apply the proof of Proposition 1. The dynamics over V′ converges. And the equilibrium can be characterized as follows 

xxxPS =

" xxx′  

> PS P
> i∈V ′(xxxPS )i
> n′

Λβ, 2111 + ( In−n′ − Λβ, 2)( xxx∗)n′+1: n

#

,

where xxx′ 

> PS

is influenced by x∗ 

> i

∀i ∈ V ′ as long as the coefficient of   

> P
> i∈V ′(xxxPS )i
> n′

, βq >0. 23 A.8 Proof of Theorem 3 

To characterize the indirect platform influence, we mainly prove and utilize the fact that the equilibrium under the assumptions of Theorem 3 can be written as 

xxxPS = βs (1 − γ + γψ 2)ψ1

1 − γ + 2 γψ 2 − γ2ψ1ψ2

ej − βsγψ 1ψ2

1 − γ + 2 γψ 2 − γ2ψ1ψ2

el + βsψ 2

1 − γ + 2 γψ 2 − γ2ψ1ψ2

111 (14) where ψ1 := (1 −α)( n−1)  

> n−1+ α

> 0, ψ2 := αn−1+ α > 0.With the decomposition in (14), we have 

Mean( xxxPS ) = 111⊤xxxPS 

n = βs (1 − γψ 1)

n(1 − γ + 2 γψ 2 − γ2ψ1ψ2) .

In particular, (xxxPS )l = βsψ 2(−γψ 1+1) 1−γ+2 γψ 2−γ2ψ1ψ2 . Take the derivative of Mean (xxxPS ), (xxxPS )l with respect to γ

and we have 

∂Mean( xxxPS )

∂γ = βs (1 − ψ1 − 2ψ2 + 2 γψ 1ψ2 − γ2ψ21 ψ2)(1 − γ + 2 γψ 2 − γ2ψ1ψ2)2 > 0.∂(xxxPS )l

∂γ = βsψ 2(1 − ψ1 − 2ψ2 + 2 ψ1ψ2 − γ2ψ21 ψ2)(1 − γ + 2 γψ 2 − γ2ψ1ψ2)2 > 0.

The above inequalities hold since 

1 − ψ1 − 2ψ2 ≥ 1 − ψ1 − nψ 2 = 0 , and 

2ψ1ψ2 − γ2ψ21 ψ2 > 2γψ 1ψ2 − γ2ψ21 ψ2 > γ 2ψ1ψ2 − γ2ψ21 ψ2 ≥ 0.

Hence ∂((xxxPS )l−(xxxPS )γ=0  

> l

) 

> ∂γ

> 0.

Proof of Equation (14) . Now we prove the decomposition of xxxPS step by step. With the dynamics described in Proposition 3, we have the equations 

xxx(t+1) init = ( In − Λ′)xxx∗ + ˜Λxxx(t)ex + βse j ,xxx(t+1) ex = Ψ ∞xxx(t+1) init ,

where Λ′ := γI n − γe le⊤ 

> l

+ ( β − γ)ej e⊤ 

> j

and ˜Λ := γI n − γe le⊤ 

> l

− γe j e⊤ 

> j

. Let S := In − Ψ∞Λ′′  

> β

,

Λ′′ := γI n − γe le⊤ 

> l

. Since α, γ, β ∈ (0 , 1) , the equilibrium is well-defined: 

xxxPS = ( In − Ψ∞ ˜Λ) −1Ψ∞(( In − Λ′)xxx∗ + βse j )= S−1 − γS −1Ψ∞ej e⊤ 

> j

S−1

1 + γe ⊤ 

> j

S−1Ψ∞ej

!

Ψ∞

 (In − Λ′′ − (β − γ)ej e⊤ 

> j

)xxx∗ + βse j



= S−1Ψ( In − Λ′′ )xxx∗ − γS −1Ψ∞ej e⊤ 

> j

S−1Ψ∞(In − Λ′′ )xxx∗

1 + γe ⊤ 

> j

S−1Ψ∞ej

+ S−1 − γS −1Ψ∞ej e⊤ 

> j

S−1

1 + γe ⊤ 

> j

S−1Ψ∞ej

!

Ψ∞(βs − (β − γ)e⊤ 

> j

xxx∗)ej

= βs S−1 − γS −1Ψ∞ej e⊤ 

> j

S−1

1 + γe ⊤ 

> j

S−1Ψ∞ej

!

Ψ∞ej

where we apply Sherman–Morrison formula in the second equation. Furthermore, we apply Sher-man–Morrison formula again and observe 

S−1 = ( In − γΨ∞)−1 − γ(In − γΨ∞)−1Ψ∞ele⊤ 

> l

(In − γΨ∞)−1

1 + γe ⊤ 

> l

(In − γΨ∞)−1Ψ∞el

.

24 Note 

Ψ∞ = (1 − α)( In − αn − 1 (1 111 11⊤ − In)) −1

= (1 − α)( n − 1) 

n − 1 + α In + αn − 1 + α1111 11⊤

= ψ1In + ψ21111 11⊤

where ψ1 := (1 −α)( n−1)  

> n−1+ α

, ψ2 := αn−1+ α , and ψ1 + nψ 2 = 1 . Hence 

(In − γΨ∞)−1 = 11 − γψ 1

In + γψ 2

(1 − γψ 1)(1 − γ)1111 11⊤ = i1In + i21111 11⊤

where i1 := 11−γψ 1 , i2 := γψ 2 

> (1 −γψ 1)(1 −γ)

, and note 1 + γi 1ψ1 = i1, γψ 2i1 = (1 − γ)i2. Then we have 

S−1 = i1In +



i2 − γ(i22 + i1i2ψ2)1 + γ(i1ψ1 + i1ψ2 + i2)



1111 11⊤ − γ(ψ1i21ele⊤ 

> l

+ i1(i2 + i1ψ2)1 11e⊤ 

> l

+ i1i2ψ1el111⊤)1 + γ(i1ψ1 + i1ψ2 + i2)= i1In + a21111 11⊤ + a3ele⊤ 

> l

+ a4111e⊤ 

> l

+ a5el111⊤,

where 

a2 := i2 − γ(i22 + i1i2ψ2)1 + γ(i1ψ1 + i1ψ2 + i2) = i2(1 + γi 1ψ1)1 + γ(i1ψ1 + i1ψ2 + i2) = i2i1

i1 + i2

,a3 := −γψ 1i21

1 + γ(i1ψ1 + i1ψ2 + i2) = i1 − i21

i1 + i2

, a4 := −γi 1(i2 + i1ψ2)1 + γ(i1ψ1 + i1ψ2 + i2) = −i1i2

i1 + i2

,a5 := −γi 1i2ψ1

i1 + i2

= i2 − i1i2

i1 + i2

.

Note j̸ = l and then 

xxxPS = βs 

1 + γ(i1ψ1 + a2 + a4ψ1 + i1ψ2 + a4ψ2) (i1ψ1ej + ( a3ψ2 + a5)el + ( a2 + i1ψ2 + a4ψ2)1 11) = βs (i1 + i2)

γ(i21 + i1i2 + i2)



(i1 − 1) ej + i2 − i1i2

(i1 + i2) el + i1i2

(i1 + i2)111



,

= βs (1 − γ + γψ 2)ψ1

1 − γ + 2 γψ 2 − γ2ψ1ψ2

ej − βsγψ 1ψ2

1 − γ + 2 γψ 2 − γ2ψ1ψ2

el + βsψ 2

1 − γ + 2 γψ 2 − γ2ψ1ψ2

111.

which concludes the proof. 

# B Peer-platform co-influence under the DeGroot model 

For the main body of this paper we have focused on the Friedkin-Johnsen model to characterize peer dynamics. However, our analysis can also be extended to the DeGroot model (DeGroot, 1974). In the following we show how the consensus result and how the intuition form the Friedkin-Johnsen model transfers. The technical challenge is resolved by the additional assumption that graph G is primitive. The other resultss can also be extended with minor modifications. 

Proposition 6 (Consensus under DeGroot model) . Consider a network characterized by a simple primitive graph G, its nodes with peer susceptibilities Λα = In and platform susceptibilities βi ∈

[0 , 1] ∀i ∈ [n]. Suppose K = ∞ and the platform performs perfect prediction of past data. Then, there exists a constant d∗ ∈ [0 , 1] such that a consensus is reached at equilibrium, i.e., 

(xxxPS )i = d∗, ∀i ∈ [n].

Furthermore, if W is doubly-stochastic, we have d∗ =  

> Pni=1 (1 −βi)x∗
> i
> n−Pni=1 βi

when Λβ̸ = In, and d∗ = 

> Pni=1 x∗
> i
> n

when Λβ = In.25 Proof. Under supervised learning policy (5), apply (6) and set Λα = In, we have 

xxx(t+1) ex = W ∞(( In − Λβ )xxx∗ + Λ βxxx(t)ex ).

• When Λβ̸ = In, note W ∞Λβ ≤ W ∞, W ∞Λβ̸ = W ∞ and W ∞Λβ + W ∞ is irreducible since W

is primitive, apply a corollary of Perron-Frobenius theorem (Corollary 1.5.(b) in Berman and Plemmons (1994)) and we have ρ(W ∞Λβ ) < ρ (W ∞) = 1 . Hence we characterize the equilibrium as follows 

xxxPS = ( In − W ∞Λβ )−1W ∞(In − Λβ )xxx∗ =

> ∞

X

> t=0

(W ∞Λβ )tW ∞(In − Λβ )xxx∗.

Apply Perron-Frobenius theorem, we have (In − W ∞Λβ )−1 is well-defined since βi ∈ (0 , 1) 

and W ∞ is primitive. Moreover, we know (W ∞Λβ )tW ∞(In − Λβ )xxx∗ = ct111 for some constant 

ct ∈ [0 , 1] , ∀t ≥ 0. Hence there exists d∗ ∈ [0 , 1] such that (xxxPS )i = d∗, ∀i ∈ [n].

• When Λβ = In, we have consensus again since W is primitive and 

xxxPS = W ∞xxx∗.

When W is doubly-stochastic, we know each node has the same long-run influence by applying Lemma 2. In other words, ¯xxx(t)init = ¯ xxx(t)ex , i.e., when Λβ̸ = In,

nd ∗ =

> n

X

> i=1

(1 − βi)x∗ 

> i

+ d∗

> n

X

> j=1

βj .

When Λβ = In, we have 

d∗ =

Pni=1 x∗

> i

n ,

and we conclude our proof. 

# C Results with finite K

We consider the following steering policy (3) where only finite K steps are observed for updating policies and the following equilibrium point performative stability 

xxxPS := lim  

> t→∞

xxx(t)ex . (15) 

Theorem 4. (Decomposition of equilibrium under steering with finite K) For connected simple graph 

G, let di ≡ d ∈ N∗, αi ≡ α ∈ (0 , 1) , βi ≡ β ∈ [0 , 1] for ∀i ∈ [n]. Under (9) , the equilibrium opinion, xxxPS 

can be decomposed into consensus and heterogeneous components as follows 

xxxPS =

> n

X

> i=1

λi

1 − βλ i

vvvivvv⊤ 

> i

((1 − β)xxx∗),

where {λi} are eigenvalues of ΨK with {vvvi} being the corresponding eigenvectors. W.l.o.g., let λ1 = 1 ,

vvv1 = 1√n 111⊤ and we have 

λ1

1 − βλ 1

= 11 − β ,

| λi

1 − βλ i

| < 11 − β , ∀i ≥ 2.

26 Proof. First of all, since W is symmetric, W can be decomposed as follows 

W = U diag( μ1, · · · , μ n)U ⊤, U := vvv1 · · · vvvn

 ,

where U ⊤U = U U ⊤ = In and {μi}i∈[n] are eigenvalues of W and {vvvi}i∈[n] are corresponding eigenvectors. Since W is row-stochastic, apply Gershgorin circle theorem, we have ρ(W ) = 1 . Apply Perron-Frobenius theorem since W is also irreducible, we obtain μ1 = 1 and vvv1 = 1√n 111⊤ w.l.o.g. and μi̸ = 1 and |μi| ≤ 1

for ∀i ≥ 2. From (12), we can easily obtain 

ΨK = U diag( λ1, · · · , λ n)U ⊤,λi := 1 − α

1 − αμ i

+



1 − 1 − α

1 − αμ i



αK μKi ,xxxPS = U diag 

 λ1

1 − βλ 1

, · · · , λn

1 − βλ n



U ⊤.

We can easily verify that λ1 = 1 , |λi| < 1 for ∀i ∈ [n] by noticing μi̸ = 1 , |μi| ≤ 1 for ∀i ≥ 2, and observe 

1 − α

1 − αμ i

< 1, |λi| < max {1, α K μKi } = 1 .

Hence we conclude the proof. 

Lemma 3. (Mean and variance of xxxPS with finite K) Under the same setting as Theorem 5, and consider the mean and the variance of xxxPS defined in (15), the following claims apply. 1. The invariant opinion xxx∗ determine the mean 

¯xxxPS = 111⊤xxx∗

n .

2. The variance Var (xxxPS ) increases as α increases if K is large enough. As for dependence over β,we have the variance decreases as β increases. 

Proof. The structure of proof of Proposition 3 can be applied here. The only difference in the result is the dependence of variance over peer susceptibilities Λα. Notice λi can be negative. Hence by assuming 

K is large enough, 

K ≥ max 

> i



log |1 − α|

α(1 − μi) / log( 1

α|μi| )



we ensure λi > 0 and the claims still apply. 

# D Additional simulations 

We defer part of the simulation results to this section. In Figure 4, we use homogeneous peer susceptibilities, αi ≡ α, and vary them while holding platform susceptibilities fixed. We observe the variance of opinion equilibrium decreases as peer susceptibility increases, which was proved for regular networks in Appendix A.5. In Figure 5, under the mean estimation, the result illustrate Theorem 2 where the (peer)-stubborn individual l ∈ U converges to a different equilibrium with different opinions in observed set O. In our simulations, when the platform is using MLP as the predictor, the opinions can sometimes diverge and don’t have an explicit trend, which calls for future investigation on the stability of the dynamics. 27 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 

Peer susceptibility 

> 0.002
> 0.004
> 0.006
> 0.008
> 0.010
> 0.012
> 0.014
> 0.016
> 0.018
> Var( xPS )

Perfect Figure 4: We show how peer susceptibility decreases variance at equilibrium. The x-axis denotes the varying homogeneous peer susceptibility while the y-axis denotes the variance of opinions in equilibrium. 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 

Retraining step t    

> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> Opinion ( x(t)
> ex )q
> Mean x*
> Mean x*

(a) Evolving opinion of stubborn individual 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 

Retraining step t     

> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> Opinion ( x(t)
> ex )q
> MLP x*
> MLP x*

(b) Evolving opinion of stubborn individual 

Figure 5: We show the individual l ∈ U with αl = 0 converges to different equilibria under different innate opinions of individuals in set O. The x-axis denotes the retraining steps, and the y-axis denotes the opinions of individual l. Left : The platform uses the mean estimation as in Theorem 2. Right : The platform uses MLP for platform predictions. 28