Title: Moving Phones, Active Peers: Exploring the Effect of Animated Phones as Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.10394v1

Published Time: Thu, 12 Mar 2026 00:35:35 GMT

Number of Pages: 42

Markdown Content:
# Moving Phones, Active Peers: Exploring the Effect of Animated Phones as Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 

ZIQI PAN, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, China 

ZIQI LIU, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA 

JINHAN ZHANG, Tsinghua University, China 

ZEYU HUANG, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, China 

XIAOJUAN MA, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, China 

Fig. 1. A typical scenario where animated phone facilitation for group discussion is helpful. When a member is zoning out, their phone steps out and dances, re-engaging them in the conversation. 

In today’s in-person group discussions, smartphones are integrated as intelligent workstations; yet given their co-presence in such face-to-face interactions, whether and how they may enhance people’s behavioral engagement with others remains underexplored. This work investigates how animating personal smartphones to move expressively, without compromising regular functions, can transform them into active embodied facilitators for co-located group interaction. In the four-stranger small-group discussion setting, guided by Tuckman’s group -development theory, we conducted a design workshop (n=12) to identify problematic group-work circumstances and design expressive, attention-efficient animated phone facilitations. Subsequently, we developed AnimaStand , a movement-enabled phone stand that animates phones to deliver group facilitation cues according to conversation dynamics. In a between -subject Wizard -of -Oz study (n=56) with four-stranger group discussions, where everyone’s phone was on an AnimaStand , the facilitations re-engaged inactive members, enhancing group dynamics, task operation performance, and relationships. We finally discuss prospects for more adaptive and generalizable animated personal device facilitation. Additional Key Words and Phrases: Small Group Discussion, Animated Phone, Group Facilitation 

Authors’ Contact Information: Ziqi Pan, zpanar@connect.ust.hk, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China; Ziqi Liu, ziqil@cs.wisc.edu, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA; Jinhan Zhang, zhangjin23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China; Zeyu Huang, zhuangbi@connect.ust.hk, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China; Xiaojuan Ma, mxj@cse.ust.hk, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 

© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM XXXX-XXXX/2026/3-ART https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026.  

> arXiv:2603.10394v1 [cs.HC] 11 Mar 2026 2Pan et al.
> ACM Reference Format:
> Ziqi Pan, Ziqi Liu, Jinhan Zhang, Zeyu Huang, and Xiaojuan Ma. 2026. Moving Phones, Active Peers: Exploring the Effect of Animated Phones as Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion. 1, 1 (March 2026), 42 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

1 Introduction 

Smartphones have become vital companions in daily life. In particular, they serve in roles that span from communication devices to mobile productivity workstations [ 110 ]. As constantly carried items, smartphones effectively engage users with remote collaborators and rich information in the digital space. Yet in the physical world, given their pervasive co-presence in social life, whether and how smartphones may foster behavioral engagement between users and their co-located peers, like verbal exchanges and non-verbal actions, remains underexplored. Such interpersonal behavioral engagement is especially important in co-located group work contexts that require sustained collaborative attention and coordination [ 124 ]. When this engagement drops, for example, when the group falls into pause/silence or some members free-ride with little effort, conversational flow may be disrupted [ 68 ] and groups’ focus on collective goals may be reduced [ 50 , 70 ]. These interactional issues can ultimately impair group effectiveness and rapport [25, 29, 115]. Previous HCI research has widely explored how co-present devices can facilitate in-person group work, specifically by fostering interpersonal behavioral engagement. Many studies introduced external third-party artifacts, such as wearables and social robots. Some focus on mediating rela-tional interactions to catalyze group relationships, utilizing physical interfaces [ 39 , 40 ] and robots [57 , 97 , 107 , 122 ] to encourage socializing behaviors like ice-breaking and rapport-building. Others targeted optimizing collaborative dynamics and consequently enhancing task performance through structuring collaborative behaviors in settings such as meetings, collaborative games, and decision-making. They employed agents or robots to enhance equity in turn-taking and participation [ 64 , 98 ], also encourage greater involvement [ 81 , 105 ]. Such collaboration process facilitation improved group coordination, thereby enhancing performance [ 95 ]. Moving beyond introducing new devices with independent identities, another line of work recognized the potential of leveraging intelli-gent devices that are already co-present with users, notably smartphones. These studies highlight phones’ sensing, communication, and computational capabilities, equipping them with specialized apps and interfaces (e.g., AR, mobile games) [ 54 , 87 , 124 ] to bolster collaborative social behaviors, thus improving interactional dynamics and relationships. However, these approaches often depend heavily on the phone’s screen, which may require users to leave regular and ongoing phone usage (e.g., note-taking or messaging) to interact with a separate app. A question thus arises: how smartphones could become an embodied facilitator of inter-personal engagement and support co-located groups, while exercising regular productivity support without application switching ? To answer this question, researchers have explored leveraging smartphones’ modalities beyond the primary on - screen interface [ 26 ], such as sound [ 31 , 32 ], to support in -person group collaboration, typically by enabling multiple people to interact with a shared phone. Inspired by these prior efforts, in this paper, we propose the design concept to utilize every group member’s own phone, repurposing it from a passive, portable computing tool into an actively moving device capable of mediating behavioral engagement in co-located interactions, when necessary, through well-designed modular motions. This design concept of making phones move actively when needed is both well-motivated and empirically supported. First, smartphones are already perceived as functional, anthropomorphic, or even ontological extensions of the self [ 84 ]. Thus, animating them feels less abrupt than introducing new third-party agents; rather, it is more like bringing a previously inert companion to life to better support users’ co-located collaboration. Second, prior work shows that movements (e.g., proximity changes [ 78 ],  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Moving Phones, Active Peers: Animated Phones Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 3

metaphorical actions [ 69 , 112 ]) of smart objects, although not specifically targeting smartphones or group facilitation, can be readily perceived and interpreted as social cues and guidance [ 51 ]. In this light, phones’ inherent familiarity may allow users to interpret and accept their movement cues even more naturally. To minimize visual distraction and cognitive load [ 65 , 82 , 100 ] of understanding and following animated phones’ movement facilitations, we argue these movements should be attention-efficient and activated only when necessary. With careful design of when and how to move, this approach may facilitate group work via augmenting off-screen physical affordances, while preserving the phone’s primary on-screen productivity affordances. To explore how this design concept of animated phones may facilitate groups across the lifecycle from emergence to dissolution, we conducted our study in a four - stranger roundtable discussion 

setting. To start with, we managed to translate our proposed design concept into a concrete design following the question: RQ1. When and how should smartphones move to foster interper-sonal engagement and facilitate collaboration in co-located groups? In response to RQ1 ,we first held a design workshop (n = 12) grounded in Tuckman’s group development theory [ 109 ]. Through iterative independent and collaborative design activities, participants identified concrete facilitation-needed circumstances, then proposed smartphone behavior designs. Analyzing the re-sulting designs, we compiled a set of facilitation-needed circumstances with identification rules, and proposed corresponding phone behaviors as facilitation that were expressive and attention -efficient. Next, to realize these movements on phones, we developed AnimaStand – a tilted phone stand with two wheels that supports moving, rotating, and signaling with lights. Rather than a stan-dalone agent, AnimaStand served purely as an auxiliary phone accessory to animate it. During group work, when certain problematic circumstances are detected automatically and confirmed manually according to the predefined rules, wizards trigger AnimaStand to perform corresponding movements as facilitation. To investigate how the animated phone facilitations influence group collaboration, and how members’ understandings of such an approach account for these effects, two questions emerge: 

RQ2. How does AnimaStand influence group collaboration by fostering interpersonal behavioral engagement? and RQ3. How do participants perceive and interpret AnimaStand 

and its facilitations? To answer these questions, we conducted a between - subjects experiment 

(n = 56). Groups of four unacquainted participants collaborated to finish an event planning task. Each participant placed their phone on AnimaStand . Seven groups received animated facilitation, while seven control groups did not, with the phone stand staying still. All groups went through Tuckman’s five group-development stages. Quantitative and behavioral analyses showed that animated facilitation balanced group interactional dynamics by re - engaging inactive members. Moreover, the facilitations promoted more effective task operation procedures, more equal peer contribution, and a trend toward higher task completion performance by managing progress via breaking unproductive silences. The perceived group relationship was also elevated, largely due to the facilitator’s ability to ease the social atmosphere and resolve conflicts through publicly visible, interpretable movements ( RQ2 ). Subjective ratings and interviews further found that participants perceived AnimaStand as generally helpful, despite occasional distraction. They made sense of it through a prediction -and -adaptation process with a transferring strategy, which yielded three distinct interpretive patterns without always matching the design intent ( RQ3 ). These results inform future designs of smoother, more adaptive, and more adaptable animated personal devices. The main contributions of our work to the HCI community are threefold: 

• We empirically explored the design of animated phone behaviors for assisting small-group, in-person interactions, grounded in group development, proxemics, and metaphor theories.  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 4Pan et al.

• We revealed the effects of phones embodied with movements on facilitating group interac-tional dynamics, task operation, and interpersonal relationships. 

• We investigated how group members perceive and interpret animated phone facilitations in ways that may explain their behavioral effects, thereby offering implications for movement -enabled personal devices in co-located collaboration. 

2 Related Work 2.1 Small-Group Development: Desired Goals, Challenges, and Facilitation Strategies 

Small groups are fundamental collaborative units in human life, enabling members to combine diverse skills and resources toward shared objectives [ 72 ]. Prior work has extensively examined factors that influence small groups’ effectiveness, including group composition [ 7 ], cognition [13, 118], and communication [34], etc. Beyond these factor-based perspectives, a family of devel-opmental theories explains how such factors coordinate while groups develop toward effectiveness. Tuckman’s stage theory is one of the most influential frameworks from such a developmental view-point, initially identifying four sequential stages— Forming , Storming , Norming , and Performing 

[108]—and later expanded to include a fifth, Adjourning [109]. Following Tuckman, subsequent work has characterized goals, challenges, and facilitation needs across stages [ 1, 12 , 53 ]. Overall, although some degree of power or conversational asymmetry can sometimes be functional (e.g., a leader or broker steering information flow) [ 35 , 59 ], Tuckman-inspired facilitation largely emphasizes role balance and equal voice. In Forming , facilitation focuses on rapport building and task/role clarification through orientations, icebreakers, and structured introductions [ 53 , 61 ]. In Storming , members negotiate leadership and responsibilities, and facilitation typically centers on conflict mediation and transparent role allocation [ 12 , 17 , 53 , 55 ,96 , 117 , 119 ]. Norming aims to build cohesion and interdependence grounded in trust, yet conflicts can recur and regress the group to Storming [ 18 , 46 , 85 , 102 ]. In Performing , groups sustain high efficiency and cohesion, though many never reach it due to unresolved conflicts or fragile norms [ 103 , 113 ]; accordingly, Norming is often seen as a prerequisite for Performing [ 103 ]. In practice, stages are often blended, and facilitation may address them jointly by promoting balanced participation and interdependence [ 16 ]. Common measures focus on keeping information flow open [ 55 ] and supporting balanced exchange among members [ 44 ]. Finally, Adjourning centers on reflecting on achievements and providing closure, with facilitation geared toward farewells and mutual recognition of contributions [2, 58]. We adopt Tuckman’s stage framework to guide our study for three reasons. First, its stage defi-nitions are highly interpretable, with clear goals that support designing targeted facilitations .Second, it jointly characterizes task activities and group-structure dynamics, offering measur-able dimensions for evaluating facilitation effects . Lastly, compared with other developmental theories, such as Gersick’s punctuated - equilibrium model [ 33 ] which emphasizes non -linear and deadline -driven shifts, or McGrath’s TIP (time, interaction and performance) model [ 80 ] that treat development primarily as a function of temporal progression, Tuckman’s stage model occupies a middle ground: it portrays development as non -linear yet gradual, with qualitatively distinct stages shaped by more than time alone. This stage-view makes it well-suited to everyday collaborations without salient deadline shocks, while still accommodating short -term groups that pass through several stages within a limited time by tracking qualitative shifts in functioning rather than elapsed time. However, applying Tuckman’s model to short-term studies requires adaptation. First, in a rather short period, groups may not progress sufficiently through every stage and may show new patterns compared with the previous literature. For example, the Adjourning phase may carry less weight for one-off teams. Moreover, stage-linked goals and challenges can manifest differently  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Moving Phones, Active Peers: Animated Phones Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 5

in lab-formed groups. To address this, we propose to instantiate context-specific challenges and facilitation strategies through a design workshop, resulting in practical animated-phone facilitation designs within an adapted stage framework. 

2.2 Facilitating In-Person Group Interactions with Co-Present Devices 

Prior work in HCI has extensively examined how co - present devices, ranging from wearables to robots to personal mobile devices, can facilitate in - person group work. Specifically, many works approach this facilitation by managing interpersonal behavioral engagement, as it is foundational [ 73 ] among the three engagement dimensions (behavioral, emotional, and cognitive [ 28 , 92 ]). Earlier approaches to facilitating group interaction were rooted in group decision support systems (GDSS), in which computers moderate group discussion progress, particularly for decision making [ 116 ]. Many studies then explored introducing additional third-party mobile devices, including wearables, interfaces, and robots, into in - person groups to enhance interpersonal relationships and collaboration dynamics. Focusing on cultivating the relational interaction, some leveraged physical capabilities. For example, the socio - spatial interface SocialStool fostered togetherness during ice-breaking through coordinated movement [ 39 , 40 , 42 ]. Others used social robots as conversation mediators to build connections, fostering trust, empathy, and positive attitudes towards group mates through approaches such as expressing vulnerability [ 107 ], mediating conflicts [57 ], prompting progressive questions during icebreaking [ 122 ], and scaffolding emotional story exchanges [ 97 ]. Beyond relationship-building, other studies targeted small - group collaboration dynamics, optimizing participation and interdependence, and finally improved task performance. In meetings, Meeting Mediator used real - time speaking -time feedback to equalize turn - taking [ 64 ]. In collaborative games, wearables like Enhance Reach are illuminated to illustrate geometric distances to increase involvement [ 81 , 105 ], while moderator robots balanced participation [ 98 ]. Similarly, in decision-making tasks, embodied agents also improved both process and outcomes [95]. While introducing additional devices with new identities can provide new interaction oppor-tunities, repurposing the already co-present intelligent devices in everyday human life is also a promising and pragmatic direction. Another line of research, in particular, explored transforming smartphones into group work facilitators. Although smartphones are often regarded as distractions in group settings [ 4 , 48 , 71 , 115 ], with many studies aiming to mitigate such effects by restricting or regulating usage [ 9, 50 , 66 , 67 ], other work has emphasized their rich sensing, communication, and computational capabilities, proposing ways to harness them for group facilitation. Research equipped smartphones with specialized agents or interfaces to facilitate various group activities. Examples include supporting group formation [ 111 ] and icebreaking [ 54 ] via mobile games, as-sisting co -located team collaboration through large shared - display interfaces [ 124 ], and enabling piggybacked co - located leisure activities with augmented reality [ 87 ]. However, these solutions often rely heavily on the device’s screen, which may disrupt regular functions and require inter-ruptive app switching. A new stream of studies thus emerged to explore leveraging smartphones’ off -screen modalities, such as sound [ 31 , 32 ], to support in - person collaboration without hindering regular phone use. Extending this direction, we investigate animating smartphones to leverage motion, operating in parallel with regular functions, to facilitate small -group activities and enhance both collaboration dynamics and interpersonal relationships. 

2.3 Animating Devices with Proxemics and Metaphoric Movement Strategies for Collaborative Interaction Facilitation 

Animating objects has been widely studied for enhancing interaction, engagement, and collaboration [ 56 ]. This section outlines the theoretical foundations, namely proxemics and metaphoric movement  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 6Pan et al.

theories, for designing the behavior of multiple animated personal smartphones as facilitators in small -group collaboration, focusing on device -scale examples rather than large - scale installations. 

2.3.1 Proxemics. Initially introduced by Hall et al . [45] as a social theory describing how peo-ple structure interpersonal space, proxemics was later expanded beyond distance zones to a five - dimensional concept—distance, identity, location, movement, and orientation (DILMO)—as a design guideline for social interaction in HCI, articulating how people relate to others and their surroundings, including environments and devices [ 22 , 37 , 60 ]. This perspective has inspired studies on interactive devices that dynamically adjust their spatial relationships with humans as prox-emic cues to encourage social and collaborative behaviors. These studies mainly utilize distance and orientation, given that identity and location configure the context, and movement is often embedded in changes of distance and orientation. In practice, closer human–device distance and a “toward-and-facing” orientation generally indicate greater willingness to connect and stronger perceived relationships [ 78 ]. Based on this principle, researchers have shown that orientation control and repositioning can shape social dynamics in human–robot interaction. For example, studies have oriented robots and controlled gaze to foster inclusive group behavior [ 19 , 106 ]. Grassi et al . [36] further developed a humanoid robot as an active moderator that was able to both position and orient itself to engage quieter participants, leading to more balanced turn -taking and less subgrouping. Beyond human-device proxemics, cross-device proxemics also significantly shape human collaboration. For instance, user-controlled movements of SocialStool s helped strangers break the ice [ 40 ], while the fixed and human-modifiable spatial arrangements of mobile devices and the environment influenced how people shared information [ 38 ]. Shifting the agency of changing proxemics from human control to autonomous device motions, focusing on autonomous change of the devices’ orientation, MirrorBot prompted strangers to converse when mirror-like robots were face -to -face [ 41 ]. Building on this, our work explores how autonomously moving devices drive cross-device proxemics changes in both distance and orientation to influence interper-sonal behaviors . Particularly, we focus such exploration on personal smartphones. Recognizing these devices as intimate extensions of the self [ 84 ], we investigate how their proxemic changes may serve as active social cues to foster collaborative behaviors and facilitate group work. 

2.3.2 Metaphoric Movement. Beyond encoding proxemics cues by dynamically altering phones’ spatial relationships with other entities via simple movements, we also aim to design their motions to be more expressive, enabling them to convey collaboration cues more explicitly when necessary. To this end, we draw on the notion of metaphoric movement. A metaphor helps us understand some-thing unfamiliar by relating it to something more familiar. According to Lakoff and Johnson [69] ,metaphor is not merely a linguistic feature but a fundamental structure of thought and experience across multiple modalities. Prior work has shown that movements can embody metaphors, thereby constituting metaphoric movements [21 , 24 ]. In digital devices such as robots and wearables, these metaphoric movements often follow patterns familiar to humans, making the devices’ behaviors and intentions easier to understand, ultimately increasing acceptance of both the devices and the messages they convey [ 76 ]. Research on metaphoric movement design spans both individual and group device behaviors. At the individual level, examples include bending robot arms to simulate nodding [ 14 ], approaching with added shear force as if pushing to attract attention [ 63 ], or swirling in a dance - like manner to attract interaction [ 47 ]. Such movements have been shown to foster positive impressions and increase people’s willingness to interact with digital devices [ 93 ]. At the group level, coordinated metaphoric formations, such as gathering, mirroring, or weaving in synchrony, have been used to convey togetherness [ 21 , 63 , 76 ], eliciting trust, positive affect, and a sense of unity [ 62 , 76 ]. In our study, we propose to design both individual and group-level metaphoric movements to cope with distinct challenges in different group development  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Moving Phones, Active Peers: Animated Phones Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 7

stages throughout the collaboration . Noting that movement-based facilitations may shift visual attention [ 65 , 82 , 100 ], we follow the design principle of minimizing attentional demand by using only motions that are essential to express the facilitations’ intention so as to reduce unnecessary attentional load. 

3 Designing Animated Phone Behaviors to Facilitate In-Person Small-Group Collaborative Discussion 

To explore when and how smartphones should move to foster interpersonal behavioral engagement and facilitate co-located group collaboration (RQ1), we conducted a design workshop (n=12) in a four -stranger roundtable discussion setting. We chose this configuration because newly formed groups of strangers progress through all stages of group development, and a four -person group supports both fundamental and more complex interaction dynamics; moreover, circular seating arrangement minimizes predefined territoriality and fosters a socially inviting environment [ 104 ]. In this setting, participants engaged in two co -design activities that identified circumstances requiring facilitation and designed phone movement behaviors to address them. The resulting designs were later implemented in prototype systems, which informed a follow -up study on their behavioral and perceptual effects. 

3.1 Workshop Probes 

We designed two types of probes to prompt participants systematically identify problematic circum-stances in group discussions and ideate corresponding animated phone movements as facilitations. 

3.1.1 Contextual Probe: Small-Group Development Stages, Challenges, and Goals in the Four-Person Roundtable Discussion Scenario. To help participants systematically identify issues that may hin-der collaboration across different stages of group development, we prepared a set of predefined problematic circumstances as contextual probes grounded in Tuckman’s theory [ 109 ]. First, we reviewed related literature (Sec. 2.1) and identified desired goals, facilitation-needed circumstances, and facilitation strategies of each stage. Then, since these descriptions of the facilitation-needed cir-cumstances are often generic, we elaborated them into scenario -specific accounts for a four - person roundtable by systematically enumerating possible participant configurations (Table 1). This set, while based on prior studies and potentially incomplete, served as a contextual probe in the workshop, where participants could add, remove, or refine circumstances. 

3.1.2 Technical Probe: Movable Phone Stand with Controllable Lights Prototype. To exemplify how a phone could be animated on a table, we built an auxiliary accessory, which is a movable phone stand (Fig. 2C). This two -wheeled phone stand with headlights holds the phone upright and slightly tilted for comfortable viewing and interaction. The stand enables forward/backward movement, rotation, and light signalling independent of motion. In the workshop, each participant received a physical prototype, manually positioning it to demonstrate plausible behaviors, and was encouraged to envision additional sensors or degrees of freedom for richer expressions. 

3.2 Workshop Procedure 

3.2.1 Setup. As in Fig. 2B, the workshop took place in-person in a room with a round table. Each session replicated a four - person discussion setting to foster immersion and context -driven ideas. After providing consent, participants worked with a shared worksheet for group designs and individual worksheets for independent ideation. The worksheet was divided into two sections, one for documenting discussion circumstances and one for sketching corresponding design ideas, allowing participants to link situations and facilitation concepts using sticky notes and written drafts. Each also received a phone-stand prototype and a cheatsheet of its physical capabilities. 

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026.

8 Pan et al. 

Table 1. Contextual probes instantiated (in italic) based on the critical analysis of group development. 313 314 315 316 317 318 319 320 321 322 323 324 325 326 327 328 329 330 331 332 333 334 335 336 337 338 339 340 341 342 343 344 345 346 347 348 349 350 351 352 353 354 355 356 357 358 359 360 361 362 363 364 Moving Phones, Active Peers: Animated Phones Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 7

Table 1. Contextual probes instantiated (in italic) based on the critical analysis of group development        

> Stage Desired Goals Circumstances that need facilitation
> In literature In 4-ppl round-table scenario
> Forming
> Members:
> (1) are acquainted with each other
> (2) are clear about the task and everyone’s
> role (themselves included) in the task
> Members are unfamiliar with each other Upon meeting each other, no one break the ice
> Members are unclear about the task The orientation is too brief for clarifying members’
> roles and task goals
> Storming
> Establish an initial agreed leadership and
> organization for future cohesive and
> harmonious group work
> Intragroup con ￿ict regarding leadership
> When electing leader, >1 persons volunteer to be
> the leader
> After election, members question the leadership
> Intragroup con ￿ict regarding the task
> organization and execution that delays
> progress
> Con ￿ict between 2
> Con ￿ict between 3
> Con ￿ict between 4
> Norming ->
> Performing
> Balanced information exchange with
> functional role-relatedness
> Imbalanced participation, role and power
> 1 person dominates, other 3 contribute too little
> 2 persons dominate, other 2 contribute too little
> 3 persons dominate with another 1 isolated
> Imbalanced interdependence 2 connect too much
> 2 connect too little
> Adjourning Members farewell to the “dead” group
> properly with recognition of the group’s
> achievements
> Negative/reluctant feelings toward the
> group’s dissolve
> Upon leaving, some member feels sad and anxious
> about the group is dissolving
> Upon leaving, no one praises or recognize the
> achievement of the group

3.1.2 Technical Probe: Movable Phone Stand with Controllable Lights Prototype. To exemplify how a phone could be animated on a table, we built a two -wheeled phone stand with headlights that holds the phone upright and slightly tilted for comfortable viewing and interaction. The stand enables forward/backward movement, rotation, and light signalling independent of motion. In the workshop, each participant received a physical prototype, manually positioning it to demonstrate plausible behaviors, and was encouraged to envision additional sensors or degrees of freedom for richer expressions. 

3.2 Workshop Participants and Procedure 

3.2.1 Paricipants. The design workshop was approved by the institutional IRB. We recruited 12 participants (5 male, 7 female, age 23 . 8 ± 4 . 0) via social media advertisement and conducted three sessions with four participants each. Participants came from diverse backgrounds, including Robotics, Social Science, and user perspectives, and were mixed across disciplines in each session. 

3.2.2 Setup. The workshop took place o ￿ine in a room with a round table. Each session replicated a four - person discussion setting to foster immersion and context - driven ideas. After providing consent, participants worked with a shared worksheet for group designs and individual worksheets for independent ideation. Each also received a phone-stand prototype and a cheatsheet of its physical capabilities. In each session, a workshop administrator began with a 15 - minute brie ￿ng on Tuckman’s model, illustrated with video clips, to establish a shared theoretical foundation. This was followed by two sequential activities as introduced below, separated by a 5 - minute break. The entire session lasted approximately 120 minutes, and participants received $15 compensation upon completion. 

3.2.3 Activity 1: Identifying Critical Group Discussion Circumstances. After a warm -up introduction to Tuckman’s small -group development stage theory, participants completed a two - phase activity to instantiate relevant circumstances in a concrete four -person scenario. In the 16 - minute individual phase, each received a printed set of pre - compiled circumstance probes (Table 1) and was asked to assess their relevance, and to modify, add, delete, or merge items as Manuscript submitted to ACM 

3.2.2 Participants and Procedure. Approved by IRB, we recruited 12 workshop participants (5 male, 7 female, age 23 .8 ± 4.0) from local universities and the general public across Robotics, Social Science, and Design backgrounds. They were mixed and divided into three sessions with four in each. Each workshop session lasted for about 120 minutes (compensated 120 HKD) and consisted of a briefing and two activities with a 5-minute break in between. During the Briefing (15 minutes), an administrator introduced Tuckman’s group development theory, illustrated with video clips, and handed out the worksheets (with contextual probe printed). Subsequently, in Activity 1 (35-45 min), the participants first added/deleted, and modified the circumstances provided as contextual probe individually on their own worksheets. Then, they jointly consolidated the individual revisions into a deduplicated, representative set and sorted it by perceived impact and urgency 1. Having documented the consensus list of circumstances most critically requiring facilitation on a common worksheet (Fig. 2A), participants received the phone stand (technical probe) and continued to ideate phone movements as facilitations of these circumstances in Activity 2 (35-45 min). Participants first independently proposed design ideas for phone movements to facilitate the circumstances from the highest - priority, documenting them through text, sketches, and/or video. They then collaboratively refined and expanded these ideas, with additional concepts welcomed during discussion. For each viable design, members role -played the four - person discussion while demonstrating, via the prototype, how an animated phone could facilitate the scenario. 

3.3 Data Analysis 

Using the workshop recordings and worksheets, two authors conducted a theory -driven deduc-tive–inductive analysis of participants’ ideation on problematic group discussion circumstances and animated phone behaviors. We first refined the set of problematic circumstances by dis-carding contextual probe entries without participant-proposed facilitation designs and merging participant -suggested edits from Activity 1 . For the corresponding phone animation designs from 

Activity 2 , we deduplicated ideas and analyzed the resulting concepts through two lenses. First, following Lakoff and Johnson [69] , we identified each design’s underlying interaction intention (e.g., expressing closeness, signaling turn - taking). Second, using an extended proxemics framework 

> 1

Impact-Urgency-Matrix https://miro.com/strategic-planning/impact-urgency-matrix/ , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Moving Phones, Active Peers: Animated Phones Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 9

> Fig. 2. Demonstration of the setup of the design workshop. A. an example of the shared worksheet where participants stick their brainstorms with the administrator taking notes; B. a scene from one session when the participants were illustrating their design to the administrator; C. the technical probe, a prototype of the tilted, movement-enabled phone stand.

(Sec. 2.3.1), we coded designs along five socio - spatial dimensions (distance, orientation, movement, position, identity) to surface recurring patterns. Finally, drawing on work on attention as a limited resource [ 82 , 100 ], we synthesized designs for each refined circumstance that balance expressiveness and attention economy by assigning only the most relevant phones the minimal actions needed to achieve intended interaction goals. 

3.4 Findings 

3.4.1 Circumstances Require Facilitation and Desired Facilitation Goals Based on Participants’ Feed-back. Analyzing participants’ feedback on the circumstance probes, we identified two cross -group modifications. First, all groups recommended adding “All Members Being Silent” to both the 

Storming and Norming–Performing stages, viewing it as a more urgent concern than leadership competition during the Storming stage. Two groups (G1 and G2) further noted that, in the Norm-ing–Performing stage, members may also work solely without collaborating. This emphasis may stem from the workshop’s focus on collaboration among strangers rather than more established teams in literatures. Second, participants recommended adding “Conflict between Members” also to the Norming-Performing stage , arguing that task -focused disagreements are more com-mon than leadership disagreements in a stranger group, and likely to intensify as work progresses. Participants’ categorization of the problematic circumstances when discussing a consensus mod-ified list of circumstances also indicated a refinement in desired facilitation goals. In particular, participants (G1, G2, G3) more detailedly articulated two objectives for the Norming–Performing 

stage: greater engagement from all members; and more balanced participation and inter-dependence without overt dominance . Although expert-led task completion can be effective in some contexts, participants prioritized equal contribution, characterizing effective groups as combining task efficiency with a positive interpersonal climate. This preference was likely shaped by our four-stranger setup, which did not presuppose ability differences, and by the participant pool: many were university students accustomed to assessment contexts (e.g., graded group projects) that emphasize equal contribution. 

3.4.2 Identification of the Problematic Circumstances. Participants also provided insights on how to identify the problematic circumstances. They generally proposed an approach that combines 

conversational features with context-aware interpretation . Consistent with our earlier find-ings of desired facilitation goal, they implied participation and interdependence as key indicators of group dynamics in their suggestions of concrete detection cues. For example, extended speech  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 10 Pan et al.

or prolonged silence could signal excessive or insufficient participation (G1, G3). While frequent two-person turn-taking might indicate interdependence, when combined with contextual cues such as volume level and discussion topic, it can be interpreted as a sign of conflict (G2). Participants also noted that while some situations should be detected automatically, others may be better left for users to assess directly . For instance, it would be better to let users decide whether they lack connection with another member (e.g., upstream/downstream members), based on the task’s progress, rather than relying on automatic detection (G2, G3). Moreover, participants noted that some circumstances that often arise when entering a new stage are not necessarily problematic, but still worth supporting . For example, in the adjourning stage, when the group is about to disband, although failing to conclude properly may have little impact on group perfor-mance as the group no longer exists, ending with a friendly exchange of contact information and goodbyes can still be valuable (G1, G2). 

3.4.3 Movement Design Ideations. The role of the animated phone facilitation differs in different cases. Participants’ designs assigned two types of roles to the animated phones based on members’ awareness of the collaborative issue and their intent to intervene. When members want to fix an issue but are socially constrained from addressing it, they designed the phone to act as a spokesperson , performing actions on their behalf (e.g., when the ongoing discussion is hard to interrupt, users can manipulate their phones to approach or signal a peer’s phone, discreetly requesting the owner’s attention; G1, G2, G3). When members are unaware of an issue and do not actively address it, the phones are supposed to serve as a role model , demonstrating the desired behavior (e.g., a silent member’s phone standing out and rotating to cue both the owner and others). In this latter case, the phone’s expressive actions redirect attention and are understood then accepted by participants, prompting them to adjust their behavior. Design animated phone facilitations in modules. Across groups, participants repeatedly reused similar animations to express similar facilitation intentions, suggesting a modular design approach. Both the formation of a group of phones and the individual movements could be reused for different circumstances across stages. Group formations like phones gathering and moving synchronously could be leveraged to support cohesion in orientation, leader election, and adjourning. While individual movements could be mapped to human-like behaviors in the same way across circumstances, for instance, blinking lights to indicate speaking, moving to the center and rotating to attract attention, or orienting toward another phone to convey support. For example, in the cases of 1, 2, or 3 members dominating, G1 proposed one design where less active members’ phones move to the center and rotate to attract attention, adjusting only the number of rotating phones to match each case. Such modularity supports coherent, interpretable facilitation with lower cognitive load across circumstances. 

3.5 Final Animation Design 

Based on the findings, we finalized the circumstances that require facilitation, along with the qualitative identification rules and corresponding facilitation design, as presented in Fig. 3. 

4 Implementation 

Building on the design workshop outcomes, we developed a four - part facilitation system for our study to explore the effects of animated phone facilitation on group work, while maintaining the devices’ regular communication and productivity functions. 

• AnimaStand , a motorized and LED -integrated mobile phone stand capable of performing the facilitation movements designed in the design workshop (Fig. 4b).  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Moving Phones, Active Peers: Animated Phones Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 11

Fig. 3. Final design of animated phone facilitation behaviors across small-group development stages, showing circumstance types with qualitative identification rules, and facilitation designs with brief descriptions and figure demonstrations. 

• An online Slack workspace 2, simulating the productivity usage of phones during group work with different channels, and supporting self -initiated facilitation such as Connection Tickle 

(the silent connection request without verbally interrupting, as in Fig. 3) (Fig. 4c). 

• A web -app backend service that continuously analyzes live speech dynamics to detect workshop -identified problematic circumstances in group collaboration and generates corre-sponding facilitation recommendations. 

• A control - panel GUI that enables the human administrator in the Wizard - of -Oz experiment to assess recommendations with richer semantic context and issue real - time facilitation commands to the stand. Fig. 4a illustrates the overall workflow of the AnimaStand system, including its backend and control panel. During collaboration, the backend detects potential problematic circumstances and generates warnings with recommended facilitation actions. The human administrator reviewed these in context, then selected and issued suitable commands to the AnimaStands via the control panel, which then executed the corresponding movements. The remainder of this section details the system’s four primary modules.         

> 2Slack Technologies LLC, https://slack.com , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 12 Pan et al.
> (a) Overall workflow of the AnimaStand system, illustrating data flow of two types: (1, solid line) from live speech processing to recommendation generation, human administrator mediation, and animated facilitation execution; (2, dashed line) from user-initiated command from their Slack workspace, to server, and another user’s AnimaStand
> (b) AnimaStand prototype.
> (c) Online Slack workspace. Left top: the chan-nel page; left bottom: the Tickle bot example; right: one private channel example. Fig. 4. Overall workflow and demonstration of AnimaStand with online Slack workspace.

4.1 Hardware implementation of AnimaStand 

The AnimaStand (Fig. 4b with technical details) is a mobile phone stand with a tilted backplate and adjustable clamps for securing the phone at an optimal viewing angle. Rather than a stan-dalone agent, AnimaStand served purely as an auxiliary accessory to animate the phone. It can perform forward/backward motion, in - place (counter)clockwise turning with two controllable LED headlights that can blink to emit signals. Handled by an ESP32 development board and connected to the back - end control system via Wi - Fi, AnimaStand can be operated to perform the modular movements when needed as designed in Fig. 3. 

4.2 Online Slack Workspace 

The online Slack workspace (Fig. 4c) comprises a general channel, private channels, and a TickleBot .The general and private channels create a realistic scenario where members need to integrate their exclusive knowledge to complete a common task. In particular, the general channel functions as the group’s shared information space, where members receive collective task announcements and post self-introductions. In contrast, the private channels are exclusively assigned to a single member and simulate the information asymmetry in real-world group work. In each private channel, members need to search pre-configured chat history and query about role-specific information (e.g., budget constraints for some roles) with an auto-reply chatbot. Finally, the TickleBot , a Slack bot that  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Moving Phones, Active Peers: Animated Phones Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 13

enables silent connection requests, allowed members to discreetly notify others without verbally interrupting ongoing discussions (user-initiated Connection-Tickle in Fig. 3); When a member sends a “ tickle ” through the bot, the target member’s AnimaStand blinks its LED lights as a visual cue, signaling that someone wishes to get their attention. 

4.3 Automated Warning and Facilitation Recommendation Generation for Problematic Circumstances 

4.3.1 Live Diarization and Speech Data Processing. The back -end web application first performs live speaker diarization on the audio stream captured during discussions. Based on all participants’ pre -registered voices before each session, we employ the Pyannote toolkit to identify the primary speaker of each second. The diarization did not include the Auto Speech Recognition (ASR)-based content extraction, as ASR accuracy issues could introduce systematic biases. The diarization output is stored as a growing 𝑛 × 4 matrix, where each column corresponds to a participant and each row indicates their speaking activity at a given second-level timestamp. For each current timestamp 𝑡 , we apply a sliding - window analysis (defined as one evaluation ) over the preceding 60 seconds [𝑚𝑎𝑥 (0, 𝑡 − 60 𝑠 ), 𝑡 ] to compute two conversation feature matrices. These matrices provide a real - time quantitative view of participation and interdependence dynamics, which is key to subsequent detection of problematic circumstances. 

• Speech distribution matrix : a 1 × 4 matrix recording the cumulative speaking time of each participant within the window. An unsupervised k-means clustering algorithm ( 𝑘 = 2) is then applied to automatically distinguish between dominant and non-dominant speakers based on their relative speaking times. 

• Directed turn - taking matrix : a 4 × 4 matrix in which each entry (𝑖, 𝑗 ) records the number of times speaker 𝑖 is followed by speaker 𝑗 , capturing the turn transitions with directions. We selected a 60 -second window based on pilot testing and prior work showing that the typical duration per speaker per turn is 15–20 seconds. In four - person groups, this 60-second window accommodates roughly one turn per member. 

4.3.2 Warning and Recommendation Generation Algorithm. Leveraging the above metrics, we im-plemented rule - based detection of problematic circumstances as shown in Fig. 5. Because workshop participants described how to identify problematic circumstances qualitatively (e.g., ”a certain amount of time”), we established our final time thresholds and parameters by calibrating empirical speaking-turn baselines (15–20 seconds [ 91 ]) through pilot trials. These detection results serve only as warnings rather than automatic triggers, because they solely rely on conversational dy-namics that are inadequate to generate highly responsible decisions. The final decision to trigger a facilitation is made by a human administrator, considering additional contextual and semantic information. For example, the administrator could delay a facilitation when the situation does not welcome disruptions (e.g., when a participant is writing and blocking the phone’s movement path). 

4.4 Control Panel 

The control panel (Fig.6) displays visualizations of real - time speech distribution and turn -taking matrices with corresponding warnings and recommendations. In the lower section, interactive controls allow the administrator to select a facilitation type and designate one or more target participants. Upon selection, a series of movement commands is automatically generated for the 

AnimaStand to execute. It also allows issuing direct commands in case of any accidents.  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 14 Pan et al.

Fig. 5. Implementation mapping from circumstance features to group development stages, circumstance types, and corresponding animated phone facilitation designs. 

Fig. 6. Control Panel. The panel consists of four main blocks: (1) real-time speaking time per participant, (2) speaker switches per pair in the last minute (the sum of two directions), (3) current evaluation with detected issues and recommended treatments, and (4) advanced control buttons for triggering facilitation behaviors. Together, these components allow the administrator to monitor group dynamics, review automated warnings and recommendations, and issue appropriate facilitation commands to the AnimaStand devices. 

5 Method: Exploring Animated Phone Facilitation in In-Person Small-Group Discussions 

Using the AnimaStand and its integrated facilitation system, we conducted a between -subjects Wizard -of -Oz experiment to examine the effects of animated phone -based facilitation on group pro-cesses (RQ2) across Tuckman’s group development stages— Forming , Storming , Norming - Performing 

(combined as justified in Sec. 2.1), and Adjourning . Post-experiment questionnaires and interviews further investigated how users’ understanding of this approach accounts for the effects (RQ3).  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Moving Phones, Active Peers: Animated Phones Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 15

5.1 Task Design 

We designed a four -person role -play task to examine the influence of animated phone facilitation during the Storming and Norming–Performing stages, with the Forming and Adjourning stages examined in the pre - and post -task procedures. In the task, participants acted as officers from four different student -union divisions collaboratively planning a Freshers’ week orientation event (as shown in Fig. 7). Aiming to explore more of group-level interaction dynamics, we embedded 

> Fig. 7. Illustration of the task design and procedure. (1) Initial status after role election, with role-exclusive information on Slack and paper materials, and preference for a particular proposal; (2) Task completion procedure; (3) Expected outcomes and bonus scheme.

individual tasks within collaborative group activities to elicit richer and more complex interpersonal interactions. Following this principle, the task comprised three components: (1) electing roles and a leader ( Storming) , (2) selecting, through discussion, one optimal and one backup plan from four initial proposals, and (3) each participant completing an individual preparation sheet in their role for each selected plan, which together formed a complete proposal ( Norming–Performing ). The execution order, strategy, and methods were entirely participant - driven. The task should possibly evoke the problematic circumstances in group work as listed in Fig. 3, so that facilitations could be triggered and sequentially evaluated. While challenges of Forming and Adjourning stage naturally occur for our four-stranger new group setting, Storming and Norming–Performing challenges specifically regarding leadership, conflict, participation, and interdependence should be deliberately induced by the task design. These four challenges were induced through the following features: 

• Leadership competition: Leaders bore a heavier workload and were eligible for an exclusive bonus (HKD 20 on top of a HKD 100 base payment) for achieving over 85% completion of their departmental sheet for the optimal plan, incentivizing leadership competition. 

• Conflict of interest: Each member had a private, role -based preference for the optimal plan and was eligible for a performance bonus (HKD 20 on top of a HKD 100 base payment) if the group selected their preferred plan, creating goal misalignment. 

• Role differentiation introduced information asymmetry calling for participation :Once roles (Event, Treasurer, Logistics, or Publicity Officer) were assigned, each participant joined one private Slack channel and received only division -specific reference and task sheets, making everyone’s full participation necessary to construct any complete plan. 

• Interdependence: All departmental sheets required information held exclusively by others, making dyadic information exchange unavoidable.  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 16 Pan et al.

5.2 Experiment Procedure 

5.2.1 Participants. Approved by IRB, we recruited 56 participants through social media and word-of-mouth (21 male, 35 female, Age = 24 .2 ± 2.9). Participants were then assigned to 14 separate study sessions (seven with AnimaStand s’ facilitation, seven without), each comprising four unacquainted individuals. Participants reported their prior experience with teamwork, intelligent assistants, and online productivity tools during recruitment. These responses were used to allocate participants to sessions to balance comparable familiarity with the experiment task background across groups. 

5.2.2 Environment Setup. The study took place in a room with a round table, where participants were evenly seated at four quadrants (Fig. 8a). The AnimaStand s were positioned on the table facing the participants at a comfortable reading distance, with surrounding space for other printed materials. AnimaStand s returned to their initial position after each movement. Participants used their own smartphones to log in to the Slack workspace (Sec. 4.2) and placed them on the AnimaStand 

throughout the session. Three human administrators were seated in a corner: one hosted the session, one took notes, and the other operated the equipment (as described in Sec. 4.4). A laptop captured real -time audio and ran the automatic problematic -circumstance detection service. Two fixed cameras, placed at complementary angles, recorded all participants’ behaviors. 

5.2.3 Experimental Conditions and Procedure. Upon the arrival of the four participants, the ad-ministrators obtained informed consent and requested them to register their voices for live-speech diarization later in the session. After the participants sat randomly and evenly around the table, they placed their phones on the AnimaStand (Sec. 4.1). Then, they logged into the Slack workspace (Sec. 4.2), which was used to simulate everyday collaboration where people use co-present phones for lightweight information access and tasks while talking face-to-face, and received a brief intro-duction to its functions. Each then posted a name and three self -descriptive keywords as a warm-up with the workspace and generated an introduction image for later usage. Proceeding to the formal experiment session, both groups received the same information and instruction; the only difference was whether the phones were animated. Firstly, the experimental groups received Forming stage facilitations (Sec. 3.5) that displayed their introduction images on their phones as they stepped out facing others, whereas in the control groups, the same images were displayed at fixed intervals with phones standing still. Then, the administrators introduced the student-union event planning task, roles, and the bonus scheme. After that, the 60-minute main session covering Storming and Norming-Performing stage began, which included role and leader election, and task completion. Once roles were decided, participants joined role-specific private Slack channels and received both digital and printed materials, including references and division-specific sheets, tailored to their individual tasks. Experimental groups received AnimaStand 

facilitation with human administrator operation; control groups did not. All groups received a last 15 -minute alert. At the conclusion, leaders presented proposals, followed by the Adjourning 

stage. Both groups were instructed to exchange contact; experimental groups’ phones moved out to facilitate participants to scan social - media QR codes, while control groups could exchange contacts in any way. Finally, all participants completed a post -study questionnaire and a 10 -minute interview (Table. 2). The entire procedure lasted 120 minutes; each participant was compensated HKD 100 plus a possible HKD 20 bonus for all and for leaders. 

5.3 Measures 

To investigate the effects of AnimaStand on group collaboration comprehensively (RQ2), we identi-fied three evaluation dimensions: group interactional dynamics (RQ2a), task operation and  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Moving Phones, Active Peers: Animated Phones Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 17

(a) Setup of the ex-periment room. The left shows a bird’s-eye view, and the right is the view from the administra-tor’s view. 

(b) In the experiment groups with AnimaStand ’s facili-tation, there were phone movements during all stages, while in the control groups, there were not. In the picture of Storming and Norming-Performing 

stage of the experiment group, the member sitting at the right top corner was asking the member sitting at the right bottom corner a question when their phone stepped out and rotated (marked in red line). 

(c) The example outcomes of the task, namely four com-pleted individual task forms, each from one participant for one selected proposal. Fig. 8. The procedure and example outcomes of the experiment in five stages. 

performance (RQ2b), and relational climate (RQ2c). These dimensions draw on Tuckman’s two realms of group development [ 109 ], namely the interpersonal (the way members acted and related to one another) and task-activity (the content of the action as related to the task) realms. Along each dimension, we first assessed a set of metrics and then conducted behavioral analyses to reveal how AnimaStand ’s facilitation of interpersonal engagement shaped the measure results. To explain these effects from a participant’s perspective, we further examined how participants perceived 

(RQ3a) and interpreted (RQ3b) AnimaStand , primarily through post -experiment questionnaires and semi-structured interviews. Next, we detail how each dimension is measured. 

5.3.1 RQ2a: Group Interactional Dynamics. Following SYMLOG methodology [ 3 ], which examines behaviors in overt interaction and nonverbal characteristics, we analyzed verbal interactions quantitatively and nonverbal behaviors qualitatively, using speech diarization data and session recordings, respectively. First, we calculated the duration of each group development stage 

to provide a foundational overview. Then, because nonverbal behaviors are hard to quantify and interpret their intent, and task-related interactions in our discussion setting are mostly verbal, we used conversational dynamics for statistical evaluation and nonverbal cues as qualitative evidence. 

Quantitative Measures of Conversations . In line with participants’ desired goals from the design workshop of greater involvement with more balanced participation and interdependence, we analysed group-level conversational dynamics during discussion with three statistical measures. 

Speech Coverage Rate (Overall Level of Participation): Proportion of time that is not silent (at least one speaker is speaking) within an observed period. Formula: SCR 𝑖 = 𝑇 non-silent  

> 𝑇 total

, where 𝑇 non-silent 

is the non-silent time and 𝑇 total is the total duration. The value ranges from 0 (completely silent) to 1 (continuous speaking).  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 18 Pan et al.

Normalized Speech Distribution Entropy (Level of Balanced Participation): Measures the evenness of speaking time distribution across speakers. 

𝐻 ∗ 

> speech

=

( − Í𝑁 𝑖 =1 𝑝 𝑖 log 2 𝑝 𝑖   

> log 2𝑁

, if Í𝑁 𝑖 =1 𝑇 𝑖 > 00, if no speech occurs where 𝑝 𝑖 = 𝑇 𝑖   

> Í𝑁 𝑗 =1𝑇 𝑗

. The value ranges from 0 (highly uneven like only one speaker ever talked or no speech) to 1 (perfectly even, everyone talked for the same duration). 

Normalized Turn-taking Entropy (Level of Balanced Interdependence): Quantifies the diver-sity and balance of turn-taking between speakers. 

𝐻 ∗ 

> turn

=

       

> −Í𝑁 𝑎 =1
> Í𝑁
> 𝑏 =1
> 𝑏 ≠𝑎 𝑞 𝑎 →𝑏 log 2𝑞 𝑎 →𝑏
> log 2[𝑁 (𝑁 −1) ]

, if total turns > 00, if no turns occur where 𝑞 𝑎 →𝑏 = 𝐶 𝑎 →𝑏 

> Í𝑁
> 𝑖 =1
> 𝑗 ≠𝑖 𝐶 𝑖 →𝑗

. The value ranges from 0 (concentrated turns like only between two speakers or no turns) to 1 (fully balanced turns like a round-robin). 

Qualitative Measures of Behaviors Induced by AnimaStand . We examine behaviors induced by AnimaStand along four features: facilitation type, the actor of the behavior, temporal offset between the reaction and the facilitation trigger, and behavior type (clustered after annotation) with supporting details; the measurement procedure is described later in Sec.5.4. 

5.3.2 RQ2b: Task Operation and Performance. 

Measures for Task Operation . We measured the task operation from a stage-based perspective. Beyond the basic five stages as in Tuckman’s group development theory [ 109 ], we further identified three task operation substages during the Norming-Performing stage based on pilot observations: 

• Initialization : After roles are settled and received task materials, members familiarize them-selves with their respective information solely without engaging in discussion. 

• Regular Operation : Beginning from the first discussion between more than two members that breaks in silence, and lasts until the “15 minutes remaining” alert. 

• Countdown Operation : From the last-15-minute alert until the task completion. The duration may vary slightly due to timing inaccuracies and situational factors (e.g., some groups may report the task has been complete before the deadline). Building on this stage view, we first measured task operation from a stage-temporal perspective .We calculated the duration of each stage and substage, and used both these durations and the transitions between stages to characterize the progression speed. Then, from a content perspective ,we identified key task-operation milestones: 

• Information Alignment : Members exchanged role-specific information to establish a shared understanding 

• Proposal-completion Discussion : Members focused on discussing one initial proposal at a time and collaboratively elaborating it (as described in Sec. 5.1), proceeding through the first, second, third, and fourth proposals. Based on these milestones, we assessed the extent to which the task materials were discussed and the extent to which the task was completed. Combining the temporal and content perspectives, we further characterized participants’ task-operation strategies.  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Moving Phones, Active Peers: Animated Phones Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 19

Measures for Task Performance . We evaluated task performance from both objective and subjective perspectives. Objectively, we calculated task completion rate as the proportion of filled blanks in the plan form (Fig.8c). Subjectively, we investigated self-assessed group performance :(1) confidence in the outcome, and (2) satisfaction with the outcome (both in a 5-point Likert scale); and self-assessed peer contribution (Table 2, Q1–Q2). Additionally, we obtained explanations of impressions of each member’s contributions in the interview (Table. 2 Q5). 

5.3.3 RQ2c: Relational Climate. We investigate AnimaStand ’s effect on group relationships from three channels. First, the typical lively moments triggered by AnimaStand during the experiment. Specifically, we noted and examined these moments along three features: facilitation type, the members involved, and the resulting behavior type and details. Second, we employed oneness as an indicator of the relationship closeness between members and within the group . We used the IOS and We scale to measure participants’ perceived post-experiment oneness between each other and their group (Table. 2 Q3), using the following formula based on prior work [30]: 

𝑆𝑡𝑒𝑝 1 : Oneness 𝑖 𝑗 = IOS 𝑖 𝑗 + WeScale 𝑖 𝑗 

2 , Oneness 𝑖 𝑗 ∈ [ 1, 7]

𝑆𝑡𝑒𝑝 2 : 𝑚 𝑖 = 𝑁 

min 

> 𝑗 =1
> 𝑗 ≠𝑖

Oneness 𝑖 𝑗 

𝑆𝑡𝑒𝑝 3 : 𝑂𝑛𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠 𝑔 = 1

𝑁 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑚 𝑖 

where: 

• 𝑁 = 4 is the group size. 

• IOS 𝑖 𝑗 and WeScale 𝑖 𝑗 are the IOS and We Scale ratings from member 𝑖 to member 𝑗 . Oneness 𝑖 𝑗 

is their average, ranging from 1 to 7. 

• 𝑚 𝑖 is the minimum oneness score given by member 𝑖 to any other group member. 

• 𝑂𝑛𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠 𝑔 is the group oneness score for group 𝑔 .In the above calculation, Oneness 𝑖 𝑗 describes member 𝑖 ’s perceived oneness with member 𝑗 , and 

𝑂𝑛𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠 𝑔 describes the collective oneness of a group perceived by its members. This collective oneness captures the “minimum envelope of oneness” which is the baseline level of interpersonal connection within the group. This metric is meaningful as cohesion can be constrained by the weakest ties: even if most dyads are strong, one single weak link may hinder collective functioning. Lastly, to obtain further reflections from participants’ opinions regarding our noted lively mo-ments and other memorable moments, we interviewed participants about their experience of the collaboration climate and their impression of members (Table. 2 Q6 and Q7). 

5.3.4 RQ3a: Perception of AnimaStand. We assessed participants’ perceptions of AnimaStand 

using 5-point Likert-scale items adapted from prior work on social robots and interfaces, covering 

interpretability , influence , distraction , helpfulness , and likeability (Table 2, Q4). In addition, we conducted interviews to probe the reasons behind their ratings and to propose suggestions and expectations for future improvements of AnimaStand (Table. 2 Q8). 

5.3.5 RQ3b: Interpretation of AnimaStand’s Facilitation Movements. To understand how the partici-pants interpreted AnimaStand ’s facilitation movements and discover possible links between these interpretations and the behavioral effects, we first noted some repetitive or typical reactions 

towards the facilitations during the experiment. After the experiment, we asked the participants at the end of the interview first for some explanation on their reactions , and then exactly about how they interpreted the facilitation without revealing our design intent. (Table. 2 Q8)  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 20 Pan et al.

Table 2. Post-task questionnaire and interview design, the questions were asked in the same order as displayed 

Block Question Format 

Perception of group work Q1-D1: Confidence in the quality of the group’s final plan 5-point Likert scale Q1-D2: Satisfaction with the group’s choice of plan Q2: Peer and self assessment — distribute 100 points among members according to contribution Numeric allocation (0–100) Perception of relationships Q3-D1: Inclusion of the Other in the Self (IOS) scale[30] 7 visual scale (coded 1–7) Q3-D2: We scale [30] 7-point scale Perception of animated phone Q4-D1: Interpretability — “I was able to understand what the animated phone meant.”[121] 5-point Likert scale Q4-D2: Influence — “My actions were influenced by the animated phone.” [121] Q4-D3: Distraction — “The animated phone distracted our group’s task completion.”[8] Q4-D4: Helpfulness — “The animated phone helped our group’s task completion.” [8] Q4-D5: Likeability — five dimensions measurement[5] 5-point Likert scale Interview Q5: Reasons for Q3 score distribution Open-ended question Q6: Portrait of members — brief description of each member Q7: Group work experience — most unpleasant and pleasant moments, and resolutions Q8: Understanding, expectations, and suggestions for the animated phone facilitation. Follow-up questions may differ depending on different participants’ experiences, but still fall into this theme. 

5.4 Data Collection and Analysis 

Our data included 14 video-recorded sessions with derived speech diarization (using the same ap-proach as in Sec. 4.3.1), participants’ post-experiment questionnaire responses, and semi-structured interview recordings with transcripts. 

• For the session videos , two authors conducted mixed-methods content analysis [ 20 , 52 ] along the coding dimensions in Sec. 5.3 to qualitatively address RQ2a and RQ2b, focusing on: (1) behaviors triggered by AnimaStand ’s facilitations (RQ2a), (2) group development stages and task-operation substages (RQ2b), and (3) task-operation milestones (RQ2b). 

• For the diarization data , we computed three metrics to quantitatively address RQ2a. We first calculated the duration and computed the speech coverage rate of each Tuckman stage. Then, we computed the average over sliding windows of speech coverage rate, speech-distribution entropy, and turn-taking entropy within each substage ( initialization , regular operation , and 

countdown operation ) in Norming-Performing .

• For the post-experiment questionnaires (Table 2, Q1–Q4), which span RQ2 and RQ3, we used the original ratings for statistical analysis, except for the IOS and We scales in Q3, which were combined into oneness to address RQ2c. 

• For the semi-structured interviews (Table 2, Q5–Q8), three authors coded and organized the data, assigning quotes to the corresponding research questions. It is worth noting that for the questions regarding perception and interpretation of AnimaStand 

(Q4, Q8), only responses from the experimental group were analyzed. Control participants an-swered these items solely for procedural consistency, and these questions were placed last in the questionnaire to avoid affecting other questions’ answers. 

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026.

Moving Phones, Active Peers: Animated Phones Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 21 

6 Results: Effects and Perception of Animated Phone Facilitation 

In this section, we first report quantitative and qualitative analysis on the effect of AnimaStand s’ facilitations across interactional dynamics, task performance, and relational climate ( RQ2 ). Then, we present findings regarding participants’ perceptions and interpretations of AnimaStand (RQ3 ). Table. 3 summarizes the key results. 

Table 3. Summary of the results corresponding to each RQ. The Welch’s t-test (normal distribution) or Mann-Whitney U-test (otherwise) was employed for two groups. Significance values are reported for 0.05 < p < 0.1 ( ˆ), p < .05 (*), p < .01 (**), p < .001 (***), abbreviated by the number of stars. We calculated and presented Cohen’s d (t-test) or rank-biserial r (U-test) as an indicator of effect size for significant comparisons. 

Statistics Measurement Analytic Segment (stage/substage/position) Experiment Mean(SD) Control Mean(SD) df/U p-value Eff.size Sig. Research Question Forming 7.83 (1.93) 3.61 (1.67) t=4.37 (df=12) <0.001 2.34 *** Storming 2.23 (1.98) 1.62 (1.18) U=29.0 0.609 0.37 Stage Duration (minute) Norming-Performing (NP) 57.41 (2.07) 58.55 (1.65) t=1.15 (df=12) 0.275 0.61 Adjourning 2.11 (0.88) 1.01 (0.11) t=3.27 (df=12) 0.016 1.75 *Forming 0.36 (0.22) 0.12 (0.13) U=42.00 0.013 1.36 *Storming 0.54 (0.29) 0.42 (0.13) t=1.02 (df=12) 0.167 0.55 Norming-Performing (NP) 0.66 (0.15) 0.53 (0.13) t=1.79 (df=12) 0.049 0.96 *Adjourning 0.47 (0.24) 0.56 (0.35) t=-0.55 (df=12) 0.704 -0.30 NP-Initialization 0.13 (0.08) 0.04 (0.05) U=36.00 0.017 0.71 *NP-Regular 0.72 (0.11) 0.68 (0.11) t=0.68 (df=12) 0.254 0.38 Speech Coverage Rate NP-Countdown 0.76 (0.10) 0.65 (0.15) t=1.58 (df=12) 0.072 0.85 ^NP-Initialization 0.35 (0.17) 0.06 (0.07) t=3.55 (df=12) .006 2.10 ** NP-Regular 0.83 (0.06) 0.76 (0.06) t=1.72 (df=12) 0.055 0.95 ^Speech Distribution Entropy NP-Countdown 0.85 (0.04) 0.80 (0.06) U=35.00 0.026 0.67 *NP-Initialization 0.24 (0.14) 0.05 (0.06) U=37.00 0.013 0.76 *NP-Regular 0.71 (0.04) 0.66 (0.04) t=2.28 (df=12) 0.022 1.25 *Turn-taking Distribution Entropy NP-Countdown 0.74 (0.03) 0.69 (0.06) t=1.69 (df=12) 0.062 0.90 ^RQ2a Group Interactional Dynamics (Quant.) Behaviors Triggered by AnimaStand All Stages N/A (Qual.) NP-Initialization 4.80 (1.82) 14.25 (3.10) t=-6.81 (df=12) <.001 -3.64 *** NP-Regular 38.19 (2.49) 29.07 (2.98) t=6.21 (df=12) <.001 3.32 *** Task Substage Duration (minute) NP-Countdown 13.43 (1.30) 14.43 (0.53) t=-1.89 (df=12) 0.096 -1.01 ^Task Progress Milestone Norming-Performing N/A RQ2b Task Operation & Performance (Operation Progress) Optimal Plan 0.88 (0.15) 0.75 (0.42) U=16.50 0.319 0.33 Task Completion Rate Backup Plan 0.48 (0.34) 0.45 (0.45) t=0.15 (df=12) 0.882 0.08 Confidence 3.54 (0.77) 3.78 (0.90) t=-0.54 (df=12) 0.700 -0.29 Self-assessed Outcome Satisfaction 3.67 (0.49) 3.68 (0.80) t=0.00 (df=12) 0.500 0.00 SD of Peer-evaluation \ 3.75 (4.63) 5.72 (4.45) U=278.00 0.030 0.291 *(Outcome Performance) Group Oneness \ 3.63 (0.68) 3.07 (0.56) U=40.00 0.027 0.63 *Left 4.14 (1.18) 4.00 (1.18) t=0.45 (df=54) 0.326 0.12 Right 4.39 (1.35) 3.89 (1.43) U=474.50 0.088 0.21 Individual Oneness Opposite 4.14 (1.34) 3.95 (1.53) t=0.51 (df=54) 0.305 0.13 RQ2c Relational Climate (Ratings) Observations and Interviews \ N/A (Qual.) Perception of AnimaStand Interpretability, Influence, Distraction, Helpfulness, Likeability, see Fig.18 N/A RQ3a Perception Observations and Interviews of Interpretation of AnimaStand \ N/A RQ3b Interpretation 

6.1 Group Interactional Dynamics (RQ2a) 

We first examined the effects of AnimaStand on promoting participation and balancing participation and interdependence, with statistical results and behavioral observations. Significance was assessed using Welch’s t-test for normally distributed data and the Mann–Whitney U test otherwise, a procedure applied throughout this work. 

6.1.1 Overall Level of Participation across Stages. 

AnimaStand Extended Forming and Adjourning and Increased Speech Coverage in Form-ing and Norming-Performing . As shown in Fig.9, the experimental condition spent significantly longer ( 𝑝 < .001 , 𝑑 = 2.34 ; 𝑝 = .016 , 𝑑 = 1.75 ) in the Forming and Adjourning stage ( 7.83 ± 1.93 

minutes, 2.11 ±0.88 minutes) than the control condition ( 3.61 ±1.67 minutes, 1.01 ±0.11 minutes). We found no significant time differences in the remaining two stages. Participants from experimental 

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 22 Pan et al. 

groups were generally participating more actively at each stage than those from control groups, as measured by speech coverage rate, with a significantly higher value in the Forming stage ( 0.36 ±0.22 

vs. 0.12 ± 0.13 , 𝑝 = .013 , 𝑑 = 1.36 ) and in the Norming-Performing stage than the control condition (0.66 ± 0.15 vs. 0.53 ± 0.13 , 𝑝 = .049 , 𝑑 = 0.96 ). 

> Fig. 9. Duration and speech coverage rate of each stage. The bar chart demonstrates the duration, while the pie charts linked out above and below present the speech coverage rate, respectively.

In Forming, AnimaStand Encouraged Collective Interpretation and Longer Speech, Leading to Longer Duration and Greater Verbal Participation . The longer duration with a higher speech coverage rate in Forming is likely due to the combined effects of the Icebreaking and Speech-Control 

facilitations. For Icebreaking , phones gathered at the center, rotated together as a cohesion signal, and then pushed one phone toward its owner with the screen facing the others, displaying a name tag to prompt the phone owner’s self-introduction. In six of seven experimental groups, members began introducing themselves after a brief pause to jointly interpret this cue, extending the Forming 

stage and increasing speaking activeness (Fig. 9). As one participant remarked, “ It is quite natural to introduce myself when I saw my phone was standing in front of me and facing others. ” (E7P4) In contrast, although the control group’s phones displayed the same personal information in Slack’s public channel, the absence of movement led some participants to only type in Slack instead of speaking, while others remained silent, “ If not the Slack where we type to chat, I actually do not know how to start up a conversation ”(C3P2). The Speech-Control facilitation prompted members whose introductions lasted under 15 seconds with back -and -forth motion, encouraging richer self -presentations. For instance, E2P4 urged E2P3 to “ say more, ” after the facilitation, leading them to expand on their keywords. One participant remarked that the detailed introduction made them feel like meeting “ a new friend than an NPC, ” recalling that “ her keywords were OT ” (E4P3). 

In Adjourning, AnimaStand Promoted Contact Exchanging with Farewell, Leading to Longer Duration with Greater Non-Verbal Participation . In contrast to the longer duration with greater verbal participation observed in the experimental groups during Forming , their Adjourning 

stage showed a longer duration but reduced verbal participation compared with the control groups (Fig. 9). This is likely due to the intent of the Farewell facilitation, which emphasized non-verbal collaboration: participants followed phone movements and on-screen cues to exchange contact information by scanning each other’s QR codes, which is a process that requires minimal verbal exchange. Six of seven experimental groups successfully exchanged contact information, often accompanied by laughter and small talk, and one remaining group created a face -to - face chat group (using a shared 4-digit code to form a nearby group). In contrast, although control groups received the same instructions, only two eventually exchanged contact information, both via face - to -face  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Moving Phones, Active Peers: Animated Phones Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 23

group creation. This comparison suggests that lower speech coverage is not necessarily negative when it coincides with more non-verbal collaboration. Moreover, animated phone facilitation for connection building could be strengthened by integrating existing co -located software features (e.g., location sharing, AirDrop). However, the lower speech coverage in experimental groups may also reflect waiting for cues, which might be a kind of over-reliance on the facilitation, whereas the less-guided controls interacted more freely. The effects in the Forming and Adjourning stages together reveal AnimaStand ’s potential that it can flexibly promote verbal or non-verbal engagement according to its facilitation intent, to enhance overall collaborative participation under different circumstances. 

6.1.2 Balance of Participation and Interdependence during the Core Task-Completion Stages. 

AnimaStand Balanced Participation and Interdependence during the Norming–Performing Stage . We further analyzed groupwork dynamics during the Norming–Performing stage—the core and longest phase of the task session—as an overview alone could not capture the nuanced tem-poral variations within this complex stage. To normalize the varying paces across groups and align their progress trajectories without relying on a strict temporal axis, we used three substages as analytic units (Sec. 5.3.2). Specifically, we examined and compared the experimental and con-trol groups regarding the overall level of participation, and level of balanced participation and interdependence, measured by speech coverage rate, speech distribution entropy, and turn-taking distribution entropy, respectively (Fig. 10). In the initialization substage, experimental groups exhibited significantly higher values in all metrics than controls, a difference likely attributable to the control groups’ prolonged initialization periods with extended silences, which suppressed speech coverage and entropy measures. During regular operation , experimental groups scored higher on all metrics, with turn -taking entropy reaching statistical significance ( 𝑝 = .022 , 𝑑 = 1.25 )and speech distribution entropy approaching marginal significance ( 𝑝 = .057 , 𝑑 = 0.95 ). In the 

countdown operation substage, experimental groups again outperformed controls across all metrics, with speech distribution entropy approaching significance ( 𝑝 = .026 , 𝑑 = 0.67 ) and the other two reaching marginal significance.      

> (a) Speech coverage rate. (b) Speech distribution entropy. (c) Turn-taking distribution en-tropy. Fig. 10. The level of balance of participation and interdependence, indicated by speech distribution entropy, and turn-taking distribution entropy. Error bars depict standard errors. The Welch’s t-test (normal distribution) or Mann-Whitney U-test (otherwise) was employed for between-group comparisons. Significance values are reported for 0.05 < p < 0.1 ( ˆ), p < .05 (*), p < .01 (**), p < .001 (***), abbreviated by the number of stars. We calculated and presented Cohen’s d (t-test) or rank-biserial r (U-test) as an indicator of effect size for significant comparisons.

AnimaStand Cues Primarily Promoted Verbal Re-engagements, While Also Eliciting Non-Verbal Responses . During regular discussions, all groups faced noticeable participation imbalance  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 24 Pan et al.

(e.g., prolonged silence from some members or dominance by a few) with Participation–Balance 

facilitations triggered in the experimental condition. We coded inactive members’ responses to the facilitations into re-engagement types (Fig. 11). In our coding, the non-verbal re-engagement  

> Fig. 11. Prompted group work–related behavior types and their distribution triggered by basic and strength-ened Participation -Balance facilitations. The left shows behaviors triggered by basic facilitation, the right shows those triggered by strengthened ones (18 cases where basic facilitation previously elicited no reaction).

only counted those reactions that showed observable attention shifts to the group discussion, such as leaning in to follow ongoing discussions (E3P1). In the experimental condition, basic 

Participation–Balance facilitation (i.e., less active members’ phones to step out and rotate) was triggered 74 times, re-engaging inactive members in 56 cases to rejoin (51 verbally and 5 non-verbally). In the remaining 18 cases, six were unsuitable for strengthened facilitation (e.g., phones physically obstructed), while the other 12 triggered the strengthened facilitation (active member’s phone moving toward the least active and pulling it toward the center), with nine resulting re-engagement (six verbal, two verbal back-channelling, and one non-verbal). The re-engagement types and distributions prompted by basic and strengthened facilitation were largely similar. 

AnimaStand’s Inviting Movements Encouraged Salient Verbal Engagement from Both In-active and Active Members, Balancing Participation and Interdependence . To reveal the mech-anism by which these interventions influenced the members and ultimately balanced the groups’ dynamics (as in Fig. 10), we first focus on the dominating verbal re-engagement (45/56 prompted by basic facilitation, 6/9 by strengthened facilitation), excluding brief verbal back-channelling. Firstly, we discovered that the moving phones not only prompted their inactive owners, but also other active members . Inactive members responded directly as the first speaker in 36 instances (31 basic, five strengthened). Alternatively, in 13 other instances (12 basic, one strength-ened), an active member noticed the facilitation and explicitly invited the inactive member to join first, then the inactive ones followed. For example, after E7P3’s phone rotated, E7P4 invited them within 13 seconds (including 8 seconds of phone movement), prompting immediate engagement. Similarly, E6P1 always (5 out of 9 facilitations) initiated talk with the inactive upon noticing such phone behaviors. Such inviting behavior between members created more opportunities for them to release prosocial signs to others, which may have led to enhanced relationships [15]. Moreover, regardless of who initiated the speech after the facilitation, we discovered that when the inactive members rejoined the discussion, they re-balanced both the participation and interdependence (Fig. 12a). When re-engaged, they often tried to offer adequate input, thereby increasing their speaking time (the dot size representing speech time grows larger after re-engagement). Since inactive members also had withheld unique knowledge during their prolonged silence, others often expected more information exchange with them once they were “back-online”.  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Moving Phones, Active Peers: Animated Phones Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 25

This often triggered turn-taking between the inactive and other members (more links appear after re-engagement), strengthening and balancing interdependence. However, in some cases, participation balance did not improve within the next few minutes. We observed that some previously inactive members, once prompted, tended to engage in reactive over-speaking—continuously talking for an extended period after a long silence, as shown in Fig. 12b. This ironically made them the most dominant speaker within the surrounding windows and thus reduced the local participation balance.                       

> (a) Type 1.1: Active Verbal Re-engagement (fair speech ex-ample ,S3 is target, effective re-engagement occurred immedi-ately)
> (b) Type 1.2: Active Verbal Re-engagement (reactive over-speech example ,S4 is target, re-engagement occurred immediately, however, the target engaged too much, causing another imbalance)
> (c) Type 2: Non-active/Non-verbal re-engagement example (S3 is tar-get, effective re-engagement did not occur immediately; instead, the target re-engaged after a la-tency) Fig. 12. Speaker activity patterns before and after a Participation -Balance facilitation. Lines on the left indicate turn -taking from members with smaller to larger IDs (e.g., Member 1 followed by Member 4), while lines on the right indicate the reverse. Line thickness represents the frequency of turn -taking within the time window, and dot size represents total speaking duration; thicker lines indicate higher frequency, and larger dots indicate longer durations.

AnimaStand Evoked Light Verbal and Non-Verbal Re-engagement, Preparing Inactive Members for Future Discussion . The 14 other occasions where the inactive members responded to the engagement invitation only through verbal backchanneling (e.g., “ ok, I got you ” by E4P2) or non-verbal attempts (e.g., attention shift to the current speaker by E2P1) are also remarkable. Although their responses did not directly balance participation and interdependence between members, these light verbal and non-verbal re-engagements sometimes successfully redirected inactive members’ attention to the collaboration and set them “on call” , increasing readiness for subsequent participation and potentially supporting smoother turn-taking later (as in Fig. 12c). However, there are also other cases where users were puzzled (3 occasions), sensing they “ should do something now ” but unsure how (E5P1), therefore reacted slightly to avoid embarrassment. 

The Effects of AnimaStand’s Facilitations Persisted When Intervention Frequency Dropped During the Countdown Operation . Upon receiving the “last 15 minutes” warning, all groups, experimental or control, expressed surprise at the limited time remaining and accelerated their task progress. In reaction to the reminder of the time limit, in experiment conditions, speech coverage rate and speech distribution entropy rose significantly (paired-test 𝑝 = .01 , 𝑑 = .39 ,

𝑝 = .03 , 𝑑 = 1.00 ); while the occurrence of phone facilitation in experiment groups dropped from an average of 4.81 ± 0.95 times per 15 minutes to 2.29 ± 1.50 times per 15 minutes. In contrast, control groups showed no significant improvement in all metrics, even a drop in speech coverage  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 26 Pan et al.

rate (Fig. 10). This implies that the group momentum for experiment groups improved by the animated phone interventions during the regular operation period may have persisted even with fewer interventions, while control groups did not enjoy such carry-over benefits. It may be because the participants in the experimental condition already formed the impression that they should “at least say something, as we have been reminded throughout ”(E5P1). On the contrary, members in the control groups did not develop such an awareness to be more active, and thus “ As the task proceeded to the last minutes, seeing the growing pile of todos, I felt desperate and did not know what to contribute ”(C3P3). 

6.2 Task Operation and Performance (RQ2b) 

6.2.1 Task Operation Progress. 

AnimaStand Enabled Faster Transition from Initialization to Efficient Task Operation Substage, While Supporting More Thorough Discussion. We first compared the temporal distribution of the three task-completion substages under the two conditions. As in Fig. 13a, the control condition spent significantly more time in the initialization substage ( 4.80 ± 1.82 vs 

14 .05 ± 3.10 minutes), compressing the available time for the regular operation substage ( 38 .19 ± 2.49 

vs 29 .07 ± 2.98 minutes). As in Fig. 13b, each group managed the discussion progress differently to complete the task. Experimental groups generally spent less time ( 9.94 ± 7.75 vs. 17 .50 ± 13 .39 

minutes) on information alignment before focusing on developing a specific proposal. Given that experimental groups also discussed more proposals overall, this align-while-discussing strategy (used by 6/7 groups) appeared more time-efficient than the align-then-discuss approach favored in most control groups (4/7). 

> (a) The duration of three substages in exper-imental and control groups.
> (b) Task operation with each milestone and last-15-minute reminder alert marked. Fig. 13. Task operation progress, including substage duration and milestone progress of experimental and control groups. Error bars depict standard errors. The Welch’s t-test (normal distribution) or Mann-Whitney U-test (otherwise) was employed for two groups. Significance values are reported for 0.05 < p < 0.1 ( ˆ), p < .05 (*), p < .01 (**), p < .001 (***), abbreviated by the number of stars. We calculated and presented Cohen’s d (t-test) or rank-biserial r (U-test) as an indicator of effect size for significant comparisons.

AnimaStand’s Synchronous Movements Broke Group Silence and Ignited Teamwork Progress . Faster transition to the regular operation substage and adoption of the align-while-discussing strategy may be thanks to the Silence -Breaking facilitation. In the experimental condition, if all members were silent for over two minutes, phones stepped forward and rotated synchronously (Silence - Breaking in Fig. 3). Across six experimental groups that experienced such silences in the 

initialization substage, five groups initiated verbal discussions soon ( 0.86 ± 0.60 min) after noticing  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Moving Phones, Active Peers: Animated Phones Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 27

phones’ movements. In contrast, in the control groups, it took them an average of 14 .05 ± 3.10 

minutes until they could no longer endure this “ awkward and perplexed silence ” (C2P1). Such exter-nal silence-breakers did more than just allocate limited session time toward productive dialogue. By breaking the prolonged period of silent individual reading typical of control groups, the early engagement emphasized the importance of interpersonal teamwork and prompted experimental groups to alter their workflow. Consequently, rather than attempting to align all information individually beforehand, they naturally adopted a more collaborative, iterative strategy (aligning information during coordinated task execution), which simultaneously fostered greater positive negotiation. As C6P3 noted, “ It could be better if we had started aligning information earlier, then we would have operated the discussion faster, ” highlighting the benefits of earlier engagement. 

6.2.2 Task Completion Performance. 

AnimaStand Promoted a Trend Toward Higher Task Completion Performance . We then evaluated task completion outcomes objectively. Six of seven experimental groups delivered both the optimal and backup proposals within the allotted time, compared with four control groups; one control team produced no proposal. Quantitatively, experimental groups achieved completion rates of 88 .1% ± 14 .9% for the optimal proposal and 48 .2% ± 34 .3% for the backup, exceeding control group rates by 12 .5% and 3.3% , respectively, though these differences were not statistically significant. 

> (a) Task completion rate indi-cated by the completion ratio of the to-be-filled blanks in the plan form.
> (b) Self-assessed outcome pre-sented in terms of Confidence and Satisfaction
> (c) SD of peer-evaluation (distribut-ing 100 points among all four mem-bers, including themselves) Fig. 14. Task completion rate, self-assessed task outcome, and peer-evaluation results. Error bars depict standard errors.

AnimaStand Promoted More Equal Peer Contribution Evaluations, with No Significant Improvement in Self-Assessed Performance . Similar to task completion rate, subjective self-reported confidence and satisfaction did not differ significantly between conditions (Fig. 14b). However, in peer ratings, the experimental condition distributed the 100 points more evenly among members, with significantly lower standard deviation ( 𝑝 = .03 , 𝑑 = .29 ). As shown in Fig. 14c, each condition contained an outlier who rated themselves 0–1 and allocated the remainder to others. Comparing task operation measures with both objective and subjective task completion measures, we find that more extensive discussion does not necessarily yield higher completion rates or perceived performance. However, it may be associated with more equitable recognition of each member’s performance and contribution. 

6.3 Relational Climate (RQ2c) 

AnimaStand Improved Group-level Collective Oneness . Using the oneness metric, we ex-amined relationships among group members at both the individual and collective levels (Fig. 15). The group oneness score was significantly higher in the experimental condition ( 𝑝 = .027 , 𝑑 = .63 , 

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 28 Pan et al.

Fig. 15a), indicating slightly greater collective oneness. In contrast, individual oneness ratings toward members seated at different spatial positions of the round table showed no significant difference, with no spatial-position-specific effect found(Fig. 15b). 

> (a) Group Oneness, calculated from the lowest individual rating within a group.
> (b) Individual Oneness with other members seated at different spatial positions around the round table. Fig. 15. Perceived group oneness and the individual with the other three groupmates. Error bars depict standard errors.

According to the calculation of oneness in Sec. 5.3.3, these results together imply that the interven-tion may have fostered the group’s cohesion primarily by raising the floor of the “weakest oneness” rather than raising the ceiling. Nonetheless, qualitative interviews or behavioral observations may reveal nuances beyond current measures. Next, we examine how AnimaStand ’s facilitation culti-vated collective oneness from two perspectives: by positively fostering interpersonal relationships, and by addressing issues that could potentially undermine them. 

AnimaStand’s Synchronous Movements Added Lively Vibe and Emphasized Cohesion, Improving Collective Oneness . Although most of AnimaStand facilitations are not designed to elevate atmosphere, many of them also stimulated socializing responses. In particular, this often happened in facilitations where phones moved in synchronized group formations. The cohesion indicated by the phones encouraged participants’ more social engagement, which may foster a sense of oneness. For instance, during Forming , participants’ first conversations are often concerning jointly interpreting the intention and metaphor behind the Icebreaking facilitation. Similarly, in 

Norming-Performing , as phones moved synchronizedly in the Silence -Breaking facilitation, par-ticipants exhibited a series of notable immediate reactions, including describing the movement, speculating about its intention or purpose, and expressing amusement through laughter or chuckles. These actions helped alleviate the awkward atmosphere created by the prolonged silence. Some even cited this as the most pleasant moment of the session (E1P1&4, E2P2, E3P1, E4P1), highlighting its value as both a progress and social trigger. 

AnimaStand’s Public Intervention Invited Joint Effort to Solve Relational Problems in Some Cases. While conflict is a well-documented topic in group dynamics research [ 1], only two incidents occurred in our study; both were in the experimental condition and were successfully resolved. In one, E2P3 and E2P4 argued over a venue for 10+ rounds until the phones approached, blinked, and returned. Their attention shifted to interpreting the movement, and they agreed to follow the opinion of the member whose role related to venue arrangements (E2P3). In the other, a disagreement between E6P3 and E6P4 triggered the same intervention; E6P1, who was not one of the quarreling, interpreted it as a de - escalation cue and proposed a vote to solve the conflict. These cases suggest that Conflict-Solving facilitation, like Participation-Balance facilitation, cues  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Moving Phones, Active Peers: Animated Phones Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 29

both the phones’ owners and others to act. With publicly visible phone movements enabling all peers to intervene and share responsibility for group regulation, these facilitations cultivate the oneness within the group. Comparatively, private intervention – the Connection-Tickle – designed to address the lack of interdependence between two members, was difficult to conceive under the tight time constraints and was applied only twice by the same participant (E1P3): once during the 

Norming–Performing stage and once in the Adjourning , purely for amusement. Although private intervention showed limited practical utility in fast-paced, in-person discussions, it may still ease tension and foster a positive group atmosphere in a lighthearted way. 

6.4 Peception and Interpretation of AnimaStand (RQ3) 

6.4.1 Perception of AnimaStand (RQ3a). Besides the three dimensions focusing on facilitation effects, we finally present participants’ perception of the AnimaStand (Fig. 16). Overall, participants rated the AnimaStand moderately high across all dimensions. Particularly, for likeability-related ratings, all are (all means above 3.6 on a 5-point scale), with “Awful–Nice” receiving the highest mean of 3.86 ± 0.65 , indicating generally positive affective impressions. As some participants (E1P3, E2P2, E4P2) echoed, “It is fun to have the phone moving occasionally, while I can still use it.” However, although distraction received the lowest ratings, it still exceeded neutral, suggesting that distractions presented by AnimaStand in group work require further attention.   

> Fig. 16. Participants’ Perception of the AnimaStand in terms of Interpretability, Influence, Distraction, Help-fulness (left) and Likeability (right). Error bars depict standard errors.

Regarding expectations for future AnimaStand development, personalization is a recurring theme. Participants hoped to customize AnimaStand ’s appearance (e.g., DIY phone cases or add a display with owner information) (E7P2, E2P3) and movements to represent their personality better, echoing one participant’s (E6P4) view that if they could design how phones move to “ represent myself, ” they would be more willing to accept its cues. 

6.4.2 Interpretation of AnimaStand (RQ3b). As reported above, participants were generally able to understand what the AnimaStand meant. Next, we analyze how they interpreted its movements throughout the experiment. 

Participants Adopted Transferring Strategy when Interpreting Facilitation Movements .

The Storming stage in our study was generally smooth in both conditions. This may be because participants were strangers and remained courteous despite a leader’s bonus. In the only two cases where Leader -Election facilitation was triggered (phones gathered, then pushed the member who had spoken most, with others blinking), the prompted participants both quickly (16s, 18s) guided the election process, though neither chose to become leader (E1P3, E5P4). Such quick responses likely resulted from their recent exposure to facilitation in the Forming stage, enabling them to transfer their understanding, “ I said something because from previous experiences I figured out when it comes  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 30 Pan et al.

out, I should speak ”(E5P4). This observation partially validates our design choice of modularizing phone behavior design, where shared movement patterns allow participants to reuse interpretive frames for faster, more effective responses. 

Participants Interpreted Facilitation Movements Through Prediction-and-Adaptation, Yielding Three Patterns of Interpretation Results . Participants’ sensemaking of AnimaStand 

followed a typical pattern. They first predicted movement meanings using prior knowledge. For example, linking phones facing others with displayed names to familiar name tags usage (E7P4). Over time, participants may adapt their responsive behaviors iteratively according to AnimaStand ’s movements, as E3P1 reflected, “ When I hadn’t talked for a while, my phone moved out; when I spoke, it returned. After seeing this a few times, I knew I should speak when it moves out. ”Because this predictive–adaptive interpretation is not anchored to an explicit ground truth, participants sometimes assigned meanings to facilitation movements that did not match the design intent. We observed three patterns of interpretation outcomes. First, some interpretations aligned with the design intent , typically enabling expected responses. However, participants occasionally ignored prompts because they felt other matters were more important or because of cognitive or emotional fatigue. For example, “When it prompts me to speak but I have nothing to say, I feel stressed and lose focus” (E4P2). Second, some interpretations diverged from the design intent . In our design, we framed facilitation movements at a content-free behavioral level. They were intended to shape interactional dynamics such as switching speakers, managing speech duration, etc., Most “misaligned” interpretations instead mapped facilitation to broader task -related behaviors with concrete content. For example, some participants interpreted the move - out and rotate movements as “share the hidden information” rather than simply “talk more.” (E1P1, E6P4) This misaligned content-based mapping sometimes still coincidentally led to behaviors that matched our intended effects: when participants were withholding information, they may respond by speaking (as we expected) and sharing it. However, when they were not hiding anything but were simply less engaged, this interpretation could lead to no action. Finally, some participants failed to form any clear interpretation , e.g., “ I don’t know how it operated, it is a bit disruptive ” (E5P1). This results in puzzled gazes and minimal engagement, which is only a reaction toward a visual stimulus. 

7 Discussion 

We summarize our key findings as follows: 

• (RQ1) Design Workshop : We proposed modular designs for animated phone facilitation in in - person group discussions, incorporating instantiated circumstances, rationale for identify-ing circumstances, and phone-movement design strategies. 

• (RQ2) Effects of AnimaStand on group collaboration : In terms of group interactional dynamics (RQ2a), AnimaStand improved engagement and balanced interactional dynamics by inviting inactive members; regarding task operation and performance (RQ2b), it streamlined procedures and promoted a trend toward higher completion by breaking silences; concern-ing relationships (RQ2c), it elevated perceived group cohesion by promoting socializing interaction and resolving conflicts through publicly visible, interpretable movements. 

• (RQ3) Participants’ perception and interpretation AnimaStand : Participants perceived 

AnimaStand as generally helpful, despite occasional distraction. They made sense of it through a prediction -and -adaptation process with a transferring strategy, which yielded interpretive patterns that did not always align with the original design intent. Based on these findings, we first discuss the AnimaStand facilitation mechanism in terms of engagement lift and interpretation. Drawing on these discussions, we further propose directions for developing animated personal device facilitation for group collaboration and for repurposing  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Moving Phones, Active Peers: Animated Phones Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 31

everyday objects as embodied intelligent facilitators of human interaction in the physical world. Finally, we present the limitations and future works of this paper. 

7.1 Engagement Management in Group Collaboration 

In designing AnimaStand , we explicitly targeted the enhancement of behavioral engagement and implicitly assumed that higher, more equalized engagement would be positively associated with improved group collaboration performance. In this section, we first examined the potential of this behavioral pathway for fostering overall engagement. Then, we discussed whether our assumption holds and what may constitute an optimal level of engagement for productive group collaboration, and how facilitation should be configured under different conditions to achieve it. 

7.1.1 Potential of Boosting Behavioral Engagement to Lift Overall Engagement. Behavioral, emo-tional, and cognitive engagements are highly intercorrelated. Sometimes, the enhancement of one type of engagement may simultaneously improve the other two. This raises a critical question: what behavioral engagements indicate a concurrent increase in participants’ cognitive and emotional en-gagement towards group work? We observed that when participants perform substantive behaviors in response to AnimaStand ’s cues, like verbally sharing opinions or consulting their own materials in order to answer others’ questions, they actively commit their attention to contribute to group work for a sustained period. Consequently, these commitments direct their focus deeper into the task, boosting overall engagement. However, when users perform passively reactive behaviors, like low-effort follow-up questions or backchannels, they are likely to merely comply with participatory expectations posed by their groupmates and the AnimaStand . Such compliances sometimes fail to advance the collaborative process and may instead introduce interactional “noise” (as in Sec. 6.1.2). Although both active commitment and mere compliance are responses to AnimaStand ’s cues, the divergence between them may stem from several reasons. First, users may already be emotionally or cognitively fatigued to engage in group work. They were either tired of the task or introverted and reluctant to engage in multi-party collaboration, leading them to offer minimal reactions. Second, users may perceive a mismatch between the cognitive engagement demanded by 

AnimaStand ’s cue and their current situational needs . To stay focused on individual work (e.g., reading materials) rather than the collaborative work, or because the current discussion was too heated for their role as a non-leader member to interrupt, participants may deliberately backchannel in response to AnimaStand ’s facilitation to convey politeness. Therefore, to foster active commitment that elicits simultaneous behavioral, cognitive, and emotional engagement over mere compliance , future facilitations require more adaptive strategies. Such strategies should dynamically align with participants’ momentary readiness and their perceived value of contribution (discussed in Sec. 7.3.1). 

7.1.2 Configuring Facilitation for Optimal Engagement throughout Group Collaboration. 

Optimal Engagement Level for Group Collaboration . Previous work has extensively investi-gated how individual arousal levels may influence their performance. According to Yerkes–Dodson’s law [ 120 ] (as in Fig. 17a), arousal and performance follow an inverted-U relationship: moderate arousal optimizes performance, while excessive arousal becomes counterproductive. Furthermore, this optimal threshold varies by expertise; experts can handle higher arousal and reach a higher performance peak than novices. Our experimental findings (Sec. 6.1.2) suggested a parallel dynamic for group-level engagement: group performance increases with engagement level, but may only up to an optimum. During the experiment, we noticed that the control groups perceived the spike of engagement in the last countdown task completion substage as “desperate and over-whelming”, indicating they had crossed into an overloaded, counterproductive state. Moreover, we  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 32 Pan et al.

noted that the peak performance and its corresponding optimal engagement level varied depending on group maturity , mirroring the expert-novice divide. Under comparable high engagement in the countdown operation substage, experimental groups collaborated fluently and self-regulated engagement effectively, whereas control groups struggled. This divergence may partially stem from differences in group maturity. When entering the countdown substage, the experimental groups were more mature as they initiated discussions earlier and experienced more interpersonal coordination throughout earlier substages. Such maturity of collaboration routines and task familiarity may help them to manage themselves better with higher engagement. In addition, in group collaboration, equalizing engagement among members does not guar-antee improved task performance . Though experimental group members were collaborating more fluently with more even peer evaluation, the confidence and satisfaction ratings, as well as the completion rates of the task outcomes, were not significantly higher (Sec. 6.2.2). This suggests that, beyond our facilitation strategy that emphasizes equalizing engagement, it may be beneficial to allocate engagement in a more role- and strength-sensitive manner for better task outcomes [ 6, 11 ]. In particular, when a specific role or capability is especially critical for a given subtask, the member who holds that role or capability may need to engage more intensely than others. In this way, the strengths of expert-led group work (e.g., efficiency and clarity of direction) can be combined with the benefits of equal engagement (e.g., inclusiveness and shared ownership).  

> (a) Yerkes-Dodson’s Law (b) Role Criticality–Group Maturity Model Fig. 17. Optimal engagement and configuring facilitation for such engagement management

Facilitation Strategies to Configure Optimal Engagement . Situational leadership principles [ 117 ] advocate adapting leadership style to group maturity, giving more autonomy from the leader to the group as the group matures. Building on this view and our earlier discussion of optimal engagement, we argue that animated phone facilitation toward each member of a group should likewise be adjusted situationally, based on both the individual’s role criticality and the group’s maturity. A mismatch between facilitation style and situational demands can either lead a mature group to become over - reliant on facilitation cues to push progress forward (as in Sec. 6.1.1), with performance might be undermined by underloaded engagement, or cause a newly formed group to become overloaded and exhausted (as in Sec. 6.1.2). We therefore propose a Role Criticality–Group Maturity Model that specifies four facilitation styles according to different role criticality–group maturity conditions as task progresses (Fig. 17b), in order to guide individual engagement in groups and support sustained peak collaborative performance. Particularly, we suggest adjusting the frequency and intensity of facilitation movements to realize divergent facilitation styles. 

• Hands-on Coaching (high criticality, low maturity): stimulate a critical member’s positive engagement through frequent and exaggerated movements. 

• Keep-up Directing (low criticality, low maturity): keeps a non-critical member on pace with the group through frequent yet less intense cues.  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Moving Phones, Active Peers: Animated Phones Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 33

• Strategic Prompting (high criticality, high maturity): nudges a capable critical member at key moments with low-frequency but salient movements, emphasizing their role while respecting group autonomy. 

• Subtle Reminding (low criticality, high maturity): maintains a non-critical member’s aware-ness with low-frequency and low-intensity movements as reminders, largely granting auton-omy to the group. 

7.2 Mechanisms and Pitfalls in Interpreting Animated Facilitation 

7.2.1 Attention Shift toward Interpretation of the Animated Facilitation. Post -task questionnaires and observational notes indicated that participants perceived AnimaStand , in their role as visual stimuli, to be both distractive and helpful (Sec. 6.4.1). One possible explanation for this dual effect is an attention shift during sensemaking of the AnimaStand ’s movements through interpreting and coming up with a response, which can be beneficial or harmful. On the positive side, momentary shifts in focus occasionally contributed to improved interper-sonal relationships and diffused tension in conflicts, such as triggering shared laughter in awkward silence or redirecting quarrels toward commenting on the facilitation (Sec. 6.3). However, it is questionable whether this is solely a benefit of facilitator design. It is also possible that positive feedback was affected by a novelty effect, which means that users tend to perceive new technology more positively in the first encounters [ 88 , 101 ]. Longitudinal within -participant studies are needed to separate novelty from sustained impact and to refine movement -based cues that retain relational benefits without undermining task focus. On the negative side, two distinct mechanisms may account for the perceived distraction accompanying sensemaking. First, some participants failed to interpret the movement or spent too long doing so, possibly because the current movements are relatively stiff and insufficiently interpretable, thus demanding more attentional resources. Second, even for those who understood the cues, the movement modality itself is attention -grabbing, as also suggested by previous studies [ 65 , 82 ]. To mitigate these distractions, several participants (E6P4, E3P3) suggested improving the transparency and interpretability of facilitation movements, for example, by providing concise pre - task user guidance to reduce learning costs. To reduce visual distractions from movements, motion designs with the slow-in-slow-out principle [ 94 ] and controlled saliency could be helpful. 

7.2.2 Misalignment Between Intended, Perceived, and Accepted Facilitation. 

Intended v.s. Perceived . As concluded in Sec. 6.4.2, participants may map facilitation movements to meanings that are different from the design intent, typically treating them as cues for task - related behaviors such as “sharing hidden information”. Such misalignments are not necessarily “wrong”, instead, they inspired several directions for future facilitation movement design. First, future designs could move beyond unified movements to incorporate more owner - oriented cues . The current movements are largely presentational, as phones behave in the same way toward their owners and toward other group members. When a phone moves, it interacts relatively little with its owner, which may shift the owner’s attention to interpret “what the phone is doing” rather than “what the phone wants me to do.” This may help explain why some participants interpreted “talk more” as “share the hidden information”: seeing one’s own phone move out and rotate can be read as the phone enacting the behavior of revealing something to the group, rather than as a prompt for the owner’s general verbal participation in discussion. Increasing owner -phone interaction before formal facilitation could strengthen their cohesion, encouraging owners to interpret movements in terms of what they themselves should do. Second, these task -related interpretations suggest that facilitation movements could carry more task - relevant meaning . For example, when a  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 34 Pan et al.

member’s information is especially important, when they become inactive, their phone could move out for longer or rotate several times, to more clearly signal the importance of their contribution. 

Perceived v.s. Accepted . Even when participants perceived a facilitation cue properly, they might still refuse to follow it (Sec. 6.4.2). Similar to participants’ compliance responses to facilitation (Sec . 7.1.1), such refusal can occur when participants are fatigued already, or what people want to do is misaligned with what the facilitation suggests. This refusal may also stem from the 

AnimaStand failing to match participants’ expectations about interpersonal relationships. In some cases, participants’ personalities simply do not allow them to increase their amount of interaction or deepen their relationships with others. While most participants were neutral or positive, two resisted—E3P4 preferring to “ connect only with select members ” and E2P3 using phones as “ a shelter from overwhelming collaboration. ” Both initially engaged with AnimaStand ’s social cues but later became resistant (e.g., ignoring prompts, responding while yawning), suggesting that in -context perceptions can shift, but participants’ “built-in” perception norms still constrain how close or intense the facilitated relationship is accepted to become. 

7.3 Directions for Future Development of Animated Facilitation for Group Collaboration: Adaptive and Adaptable 

7.3.1 Adaptive Animated Facilitation from a Combined Standpoint of Both a Participant and an Observer. Our current facilitation is rule - based and also relies solely on features observed from a third - person perspective. As discussed previously (Sec. 7.1 and 7.2), to foster participants’ acceptance of the facilitation and to optimize its effects, we argue that a more efficient animated device should apply different facilitations adapted to each group member. Specifically, adapt decisions (e.g., movement choice) to individual mental states, and adjust style (e.g., frequency, amplitude of the movements) to group maturity and the specific member’s role . Furthermore, ground-ing these adaptive movements directly in the users’ personal and group states would allow the smartphone’s ontological attribute as a “self-extension” to be thoroughly realized in the interaction loop. This shift will further differentiate the animated devices’ role from an invisible, overarching hand regulating the group. Based on our empirical evidence, we propose to use adaptive mental model construction and macro - level adaptive strategy to realize adaptation according to individual states and group progress, respectively. In the following, we outline a potential technical roadmap for realizing such adaptive animated facilitation. 

Adaptation to Individual States: Mental Model Construction. Drawing on Mathieu et al .[79] ’s typology, which conceptualizes groups’ shared mental models in team and task dimensions, we identify two critical mental model elements from our observations: First, perceived relationship norms within the group. Relationship norms include both general perceptions of how close they should be with groupmates shaped by prior experiences, and in -context perceptions that evolve during collaboration. This element appeared in our study as varying comfort levels with connection -building. As suggested in Sec. 7.2.2, different people may accept different levels of closeness with others. Thus, adaptive facilitation should consider the perception of relationship norms to encourage cooperation within acceptable bounds for better and long-lasting effects. Second, perceived task priorities and situational awareness. This refers to how individuals define their immediate focus, role responsibilities, and readiness to act. As discussed earlier in Sec. 7.1.1, these task - related perception elements should be integrated into the adaptive framework so that facilitation better matches members’ perceived readiness and the actions they consider feasible. To build an adaptive mental model that embodies these elements, animated facilitation can start from tuning initial levels individually based on profiling user portraits. Then, the animated  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Moving Phones, Active Peers: Animated Phones Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 35

phone may use richer context sensing, which combines screen activity, cameras, and environmental sensors like attached -to -table sensors, to infer behaviors such as writing, zoning out, or task - related phone use [ 74 ]. These signals, analyzed in temporal windows, can then infer dynamic mental states [27, 49], enabling the animated device to adapt movement choices and styles to each participant. 

Adaptation to Group Maturity and Role Criticality: Macro-level Facilitation Strategy. 

As suggested in Sec. 7.1.2, we proposed four styles of facilitation under different role criticality-group maturity conditions. As the task progresses, facilitation with different styles should be sent to different members in order to help the group operate in an optimal way. To realize such style adaptation, we need to identify which role is currently most critical to the ongoing task, and which level of maturity the group is obtaining. In practice, analysis of task progress and discussion content via LLM [ 123 ] could match the current challenge with the most suitable member to take the temporary lead, based on past behavior and member profiles. Moreover, combining such content analysis with conversation dynamics (e.g., balanced participation, interdependence as in Sec. 4.3.2) and assessments of the alignment among members’ mental models [ 79 , 114 ] can help gauge the group’s maturity level. Given estimates of each role’s criticality and the group’s maturity, we can then map the current appropriate facilitation style for each member. Concrete design can implement these styles into visible movements by parameterizing movement features such as frequency, intensity, and timing thresholds. For instance, suppose content analysis identifies member A as best suited to lead. In a newly formed group, A’s device might move to the center and rotate after one minute of A’s silence, while others’ devices only do so after two minutes. In a more mature group, these thresholds could be relaxed–A’s device moves after two minutes and others’ after three–signaling greater trust in the group’s self - regulation while still prioritizing the member most suited to take the lead. 

7.3.2 Adaptable and Personalizable Animated Facilitation. Personalization is another key direction proposed by participants. While phones are personal devices, the current design applies the same movements to all participants, not yet fully reflecting this connection. Thus, allowing users to customize their phone’s movements could make the phone’s behavior more similar to its owner’s style and strengthen users’ sense of alignment with the phone, which in turn may increase their willingness to accept facilitation (see participants’ quotes in Sec. 6.4.1). However, personalized movements should be acceptable not only to the phone owner but also to other group members to effectively support collaboration, so the degree of personalization needs to be bounded. For each problematic situation, the underlying facilitation logic and basic movement pattern should remain consistent. For instance, when a group member is left out, that member’s phone should always move forward to attract attention, regardless of who it is, while the specific way of moving forward (such as trajectory or style) can be customized. For example, for the basic action of moving forward, one user might favor a swaying gait, while another might choose a slower, steadier pace. When phones gather together, they could express individual character in their movements while remaining sufficiently synchronized to preserve coordination. 

7.4 Directions for Repurposing Objects 

Our design of AnimaStand repurposed phones as group facilitators by enabling them to move actively and expressively. This concept of Repurposing Everyday Objects has been widely explored and well-established in HCI [ 89 , 99 ]. The purpose of an object is shaped by its affordances in a given context . Its primary purpose is determined by how it enacts its canonical affordances in a canonical context. Previous studies have approached the notion of repurposing along three main pathways (Fig. 18).  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 36 Pan et al.
> Fig. 18. Pathways to repurpose objects.

First, canonical affordances are enacted in a new context. For example, reusing an old smartphone camera module as a home - surveillance camera [ 77 ]. Second, possible affordances which extended from an object’s physical properties are enacted in its canonical context, such as in affordance - based planning: when a chair is used as a surface for placing objects, while a friend is instead invited to sit on a cardboard box [ 83 ]. Third, possible affordances are enacted in a new context. For instance, using everyday physical objects as controllers in VR environments [ 23 , 75 ]. Across these three pathways, either the canonical context or the canonical affordance tends to be substantially replaced or overridden. Our study, in contrast, adopted a different pathway to realize repurposing (Fig. 18, left): we keep the object in its canonical context and augment its canonical affordance in a way that does not interfere with or override it. Specifically, we keep the smartphone as a mediator in group communication and augment this role, extending it from supporting digital information exchange to facilitating and enriching co -located interpersonal interaction. We argue that this pathway is increasingly significant. As expectations for virtual agents entering physical reality grow with advances in AI, the challenges of embodied intelligence become paramount [ 43 , 90 ]. A key challenge is integrating new technologies into everyday environments with minimal intrusion and cognitive load [ 86 ]. By augmenting the must-have objects’ role in certain contexts with new functionalities, this repurposing pathway effectively responds to this challenge. Instead of introducing new artifacts, it embodies intelligence in objects that people already use and emotionally relate to. Such experience-grounded embodiment can make agentic behaviors more emotionally legible and acceptable, and reduce the cognitive friction associated with novel robotic forms. Moreover, repurposing objects into additional roles (“ upcycling ”) may strengthen users’ attachment and encourage longer-term use, which in turn supports sustainability [ 10 ]. This direction also presents key challenges, including preventing conflicts between the augmented functionality and the canonical affordance and making it feel natural rather than confusing, which needs further investigation. 

7.5 Limitation and Future Work 

This work has several limitations that inform directions for further exploration. First, the current facilitation strategy and movement designs are rather rule-based and naive. We plan to implement the adaptive animated facilitation design as proposed in Sec. 7.3 and evaluate its impact. In addition, the current study was conducted with short -term interactions (about an hour) among small, ad -hoc groups of strangers; future work will examine longer -term deployments to observe how animated facilitation influences sustained group development. Moreover, our investigation focused on dyadic facilitation dynamics within a four -person discussion group. Whether the findings generalize to larger or more complex configurations remains an open question, and we plan to explore diverse 

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026.

Moving Phones, Active Peers: Animated Phones Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 37 

group sizes, task types, and settings to assess the scalability and robustness of this approach. Finally, this work is an exploratory study, and there is a gap between our prototype’s demonstrated facilitation potential and its acceptance as a real -world product. We may develop more advanced stand-alone prototypes and focus more on user experience. 

8 Conclusion 

This work explored how animated smartphones can facilitate small -group in - person collaboration. A design workshop identified facilitation needs across Tuckman’s group stages, informing proxemics -and metaphor -driven phone movements. We implemented these on AnimaStand , a semi -automated, movement - enabled phone stand, and evaluated them in a between -subjects Wizard -of -Oz study. Results showed that animated facilitation improved engagement and balanced interactional dy-namics by re -engaging inactive members. Regarding task operation, it streamlined task procedures, equalized contributions, and had the potential to improve task completion. Perceived group rela-tionships were also elevated. Subjective ratings and interviews further indicated that AnimaStand 

is generally found helpful, despite occasional distraction. Participants made sense of it through prediction -and -adaptation with a transferring strategy and yielded three interpretive patterns, highlighting that AnimaStand ’s effects emerged from the interplay between its publicly visible move-ments and participants’ interpretations. This work integrates group development, proxemics, and metaphor theories to design and study animated phone behaviors, showing how movement -enabled devices can enhance group dynamics and relationships, informing future designs for adaptive and adaptable animated personal devices, and pathways for repurposing everyday devices. 

References 

[1] Tawfig Khidir Ibnouf Adham. 2023. Optimizing the construction team lifecycle: Exploring influential factors and effective strategies. Sch J Eng Tech 10 (2023), 268–279. [2] Dinesh Kumar Badyal. 2023. Small-group and team-building process in teaching–learning of pharmacology. 117– 122 pages. [3] Robert F Bales and Stephen F Cohen. 1982. Symlog . Stuttgart. [4] Elyssa M Barrick, Alixandra Barasch, and Diana I Tamir. 2022. The unexpected social consequences of diverting attention to our phones. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 101 (2022), 104344. [5] Christoph Bartneck, Dana Kulić, Elizabeth Croft, and Susana Zoghbi. 2009. Measurement instruments for the anthropomorphism, animacy, likeability, perceived intelligence, and perceived safety of robots. International journal of social robotics 1, 1 (2009), 71–81. [6] Bernard Bass. 2014. Individual capability, team performance, and team productivity. In Human performance and productivity . Psychology Press, 179–232. [7] R Meredith Belbin and Victoria Brown. 2022. Team roles at work . Routledge. [8] Raoul Bell, Gesa Fee Komar, Laura Mieth, and Axel Buchner. 2023. Evidence of a metacognitive illusion in judgments about the effects of music on cognitive performance. Scientific Reports 13, 1 (2023), 18750. [9] Thornton Bill, Faires Alyson, Robbins Maija, and Rollins Eric. 2015. The Mere Presence of a Cell Phone May be Distracting. Social Psychology (2015). [10] Eli Blevis. 2007. Sustainable interaction design: invention & disposal, renewal & reuse. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . 503–512. [11] Michelle C Bligh, Craig L Pearce, and Jeffrey C Kohles. 2006. The importance of self-and shared leadership in team based knowledge work: A meso-level model of leadership dynamics. Journal of managerial Psychology 21, 4 (2006), 296–318. [12] Denise A Bonebright. 2010. 40 years of storming: a historical review of Tuckman’s model of small group development. 

Human Resource Development International 13, 1 (2010), 111–120. [13] Janis A Cannon-Bowers, Eduardo Salas, and Sharolyn Converse. 1993. Shared mental models in expert team decision making. Individual and group decision making: Current issues 221 (1993), 221–46. [14] Hoang-Long Cao, Constantin Scholz, Joris De Winter, Ilias El Makrini, and Bram Vanderborght. 2023. Investigating the role of multi-modal social cues in human-robot collaboration in industrial settings. International Journal of Social Robotics 15, 7 (2023), 1169–1179. , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 38 Pan et al. 

[15] Marcella Caputi, Serena Lecce, Adriano Pagnin, and Robin Banerjee. 2012. Longitudinal effects of theory of mind on later peer relations: the role of prosocial behavior. Developmental psychology 48, 1 (2012), 257. [16] Eric Chong. 2007. Role balance and team development: A study of team role characteristics underlying high and low performing teams. Journal of Behavioral and Applied Management 8, 3 (2007), 202–217. [17] Shih Yung Chou and Decima Chris Garcia. 2011. Group organizational citizenship behavior in the stages of group development. International Journal of Business and Management 6, 10 (2011), 3. [18] Crystal Broch Colombini and Maureen McBride. 2012. “Storming and norming”: Exploring the value of group development models in addressing conflict in communal writing assessment. Assessing writing 17, 4 (2012), 191–207. [19] Joe Connolly, Nathan Tsoi, and Marynel Vázquez. 2021. Perceptions of Conversational Group Membership based on Robots’ Spatial Positioning: Effects of Embodiment. In Companion of the 2021 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction . 372–376. [20] John W Creswell and Vicki L Plano Clark. 2017. Designing and conducting mixed methods research . Sage publications. [21] Minh Duc Dang, Samira Pulatova, and Lawrence H Kim. 2025. User-Defined Co-Speech Gesture Design with Swarm Robots. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–15. [22] Paulo César Pérez Daza. 2021. Proxemic Interactions with Mobile Devices . Ph. D. Dissertation. Université de Pau et des Pays de l’Adour. [23] Cathy Mengying Fang, Ryo Suzuki, and Daniel Leithinger. 2023. Vr haptics at home: Repurposing everyday objects and environment for casual and on-demand vr haptic experiences. In Extended Abstracts of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–7. [24] Brenda Farnell. 1996. Metaphors we move by. Visual Anthropology 8, 2-4 (1996), 311–335. [25] Fabio Fonti, Massimo Maoret, and Robert Whitbred. 2017. Free-riding in multi-party alliances: The role of perceived alliance effectiveness and peers’ collaboration in a research consortium. Strategic Management Journal 38, 2 (2017), 363–383. [26] Michal Frackowiak. 2025. How Co-Present Mobile Phone Use Affects Relationships: Towards Novel Conceptual and Methodological Developments . Ph. D. Dissertation. Université de Lausanne, Faculté des sciences sociales et politiques. [27] John R Frederiksen, Barbara Y White, and Joshua Gutwill. 1999. Dynamic mental models in learning science: The importance of constructing derivational linkages among models. Journal of Research in Science Teaching: The Official Journal of the National Association for Research in Science Teaching 36, 7 (1999), 806–836. [28] Jennifer A Fredricks, Phyllis C Blumenfeld, and Alison H Paris. 2004. School engagement: Potential of the concept, state of the evidence. Review of educational research 74, 1 (2004), 59–109. [29] John RP French Jr. 1941. The disruption and cohesion of groups. The journal of Abnormal and social psychology 36, 3 (1941), 361. [30] Simon Gächter, Chris Starmer, and Fabio Tufano. 2025. Measuring group cohesion to reveal the power of social relationships in team production. Review of Economics and Statistics 107, 2 (2025), 539–554. [31] Hüseyin Uğur Genç. 2024. Designing for Rich Collocated Social Interactions in the Age of Smartphones. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13465 (2024). [32] Hüseyin Ugur Genç and Aykut Coskun. 2020. Designing for social interaction in the age of excessive smartphone Use. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–13. [33] Connie JG Gersick. 1988. Time and transition in work teams: Toward a new model of group development. Academy of Management journal 31, 1 (1988), 9–41. [34] Dennis S Gouran and Randy Y Hirokawa. 1996. Functional theory and communication in decision-making and problem-solving groups: An expanded view. (1996). [35] George B Graen and Mary Uhl-Bien. 1995. Relationship-based approach to leadership: Development of leader-member exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 25 years: Applying a multi-level multi-domain perspective. The leadership quarterly 6, 2 (1995), 219–247. [36] Lucrezia Grassi, Carmine Tommaso Recchiuto, and Antonio Sgorbissa. 2024. Moderating Group Conversation Dynamics with Social Robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00151 (2024). [37] Saul Greenberg, Nicolai Marquardt, Till Ballendat, Rob Diaz-Marino, and Miaosen Wang. 2011. Proxemic interactions: the new ubicomp? interactions 18, 1 (2011), 42–50. [38] Jens Emil Grønbæk, Mille Skovhus Knudsen, Kenton O’Hara, Peter Gall Krogh, Jo Vermeulen, and Marianne Graves Petersen. 2020. Proxemics beyond proximity: Designing for flexible social interaction through cross-device interaction. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–14. [39] Ge Guo. 2025. Designing Socio-Spatial Interfaces for Embodied and Situated Social Interaction. In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–6. [40] Ge Guo, Gilly Leshed, and Keith Evan Green. 2023. “I normally wouldn’t talk with strangers”: Introducing a Socio-Spatial Interface for Fostering Togetherness Between Strangers. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–20. , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Moving Phones, Active Peers: Animated Phones Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 39 

[41] Ge Guo, Qi Yang, Yunting Yan, Xiaoman Yang, Guy Hoffman, Gilly Leshed, and Keith Evan Green. 2025. MirrorBot: Exploring Socio-Spatial Interactions that Foster Serendipitous Human Connections Through Robotic Mirrors. In 

Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–6. [42] Serena Ge Guo, Hsin-Ming Chao, Huong Pham, Gilly Leshed, and Keith Evan Green. 2025. Unraveling strangers’ interaction: an analytical framework for understanding the ice-breaking process with a socio-spatial interface. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 32, 5 (2025), 1–38. [43] Agrim Gupta, Silvio Savarese, Surya Ganguli, and Li Fei-Fei. 2021. Embodied intelligence via learning and evolution. 

Nature communications 12, 1 (2021), 5721. [44] Obasi Haki Akan. 2005. The role of concrescent conversation in the performing stage of work groups. Team Performance Management: An International Journal 11, 1/2 (2005), 51–62. [45] Edward T Hall, Ray L Birdwhistell, Bernhard Bock, Paul Bohannan, A Richard Diebold Jr, Marshall Durbin, Munro S Edmonson, JL Fischer, Dell Hymes, Solon T Kimball, et al . 1968. Proxemics [and comments and replies]. Current anthropology 9, 2/3 (1968), 83–108. [46] Troy B Hall. 2015. Examining the relationship between group cohesion and group performance in Tuckman’s (1965) group life cycle model on an individual-level basis . Ph. D. Dissertation. Regent University. [47] John Harris and Ehud Sharlin. 2011. Exploring the affect of abstract motion in social human-robot interaction. In 

2011 ro-man . IEEE, 441–448. [48] Maxi Heitmayer and Saadi Lahlou. 2021. Why are smartphones disruptive? An empirical study of smartphone use in real-life contexts. Computers in Human Behavior 116 (2021), 106637. [49] Jacqueline Hemminghaus and Stefan Kopp. 2017. Towards adaptive social behavior generation for assistive robots using reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM/IEEE international conference on human-robot interaction .332–340. [50] Gillian Hendry, Sally Wiggins, and Tony Anderson. 2016. Are you still with us? Managing mobile phone use and group interaction in PBL. Interdisciplinary Journal of Problem-Based Learning 10, 2 (2016). [51] Guy Hoffman and Wendy Ju. 2014. Designing robots with movement in mind. J. Hum.-Robot Interact. 3, 1 (Feb. 2014), 91–122. doi:10.5898/JHRI.3.1.Hoffman [52] Hsiu-Fang Hsieh and Sarah E Shannon. 2005. Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. Qualitative health research 15, 9 (2005), 1277–1288. [53] Jack K Ito and Céleste M Brotheridge. 2008. Do teams grow up one stage at a time? Exploring the complexity of group development models. Team Performance Management: An International Journal 14, 5/6 (2008), 214–232. [54] Pradthana Jarusriboonchai, Aris Malapaschas, and Thomas Olsson. 2016. Design and Evaluation of a Multi-Player Mobile Game for Icebreaking Activity. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (San Jose, California, USA) (CHI ’16) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 4366–4377. doi:10.1145/2858036.2858298 [55] John E Jones and William Bearley. 1993. Group development assessment . Organization Design and Development. [56] Wendy Ju and David Sirkin. 2010. Animate objects: How physical motion encourages public interaction. In International Conference on Persuasive Technology . Springer, 40–51. [57] Malte F Jung, Nikolas Martelaro, and Pamela J Hinds. 2015. Using robots to moderate team conflict: the case of repairing violations. In Proceedings of the tenth annual ACM/IEEE international conference on human-robot interaction .229–236. [58] Pawel Kazanowski. 2022. A Mixed Methods Approach to Investigating Adjourning Phase Behavior in a Sample of the Product Development Teams in the Light Metal Forming Industry. (2022). [59] Dacher Keltner, Deborah H Gruenfeld, and Cameron Anderson. 2003. Power, approach, and inhibition. Psychological review 110, 2 (2003), 265. [60] Adam Kendon. 1990. Conducting interaction: Patterns of behavior in focused encounters . Vol. 7. CUP Archive. [61] Dongmi Kim and Otito Frances Iwuchukwu. 2022. Improving team dynamics for project based learning in pharmacy: A multimodal approach. Currents in Pharmacy Teaching and Learning 14, 5 (2022), 655–663. [62] Jingoog Kim and Mary Lou Maher. 2020. Conceptual metaphors for designing smart environments: device, robot, and friend. Frontiers in Psychology 11 (2020), 198. [63] Lawrence H Kim and Sean Follmer. 2019. Swarmhaptics: Haptic display with swarm robots. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–13. [64] Taemie Kim, Agnes Chang, Lindsey Holland, and Alex Sandy Pentland. 2008. Meeting mediator: enhancing group collaborationusing sociometric feedback. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work . 457–466. [65] Raymond M Klein. 1976. Attention and movement. In Motor control . Elsevier, 143–173. [66] Minsam Ko, Chayanin Wong, Sunmin Son, Euigon Jung, Uichin Lee, Seungwoo Choi, Sungho Jo, and Min H Kim. 2015. Lock n’LoL: Mitigating Smartphone Disturbance in Co-located Social Interactions. In Proceedings of the 33rd 

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 40 Pan et al. 

Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1561–1566. [67] Minsam Ko, Subin Yang, Joonwon Lee, Christian Heizmann, Jinyoung Jeong, Uichin Lee, Daehee Shin, Koji Yatani, Junehwa Song, and Kyong-Mee Chung. 2015. NUGU: a group-based intervention app for improving self-regulation of limiting smartphone use. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on computer supported cooperative work & social computing . 1235–1245. [68] Namkje Koudenburg, Tom Postmes, and Ernestine H Gordijn. 2011. Disrupting the flow: How brief silences in group conversations affect social needs. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 47, 2 (2011), 512–515. [69] George Lakoff and Mark Johnson. 2008. Metaphors we live by . University of Chicago press. [70] Sophie Leroy, Aaron M Schmidt, and Nora Madjar. 2020. Interruptions and task transitions: Understanding their characteristics, processes, and consequences. Academy of Management Annals 14, 2 (2020), 661–694. [71] Robin Leuppert and Sarah Geber. 2020. Commonly done but not socially accepted? Phubbing and social norms in dyadic and small group settings. Communication Research Reports 37, 3 (2020), 55–64. [72] John M Levine and Richard L Moreland. 2008. Small groups: An overview. Small groups (2008), 17–26. [73] Yibing Li and Richard M Lerner. 2013. Interrelations of behavioral, emotional, and cognitive school engagement in high school students. Journal of youth and adolescence 42, 1 (2013), 20–32. [74] Yang Li, Guanci Yang, Zhidong Su, Shaobo Li, and Yang Wang. 2023. Human activity recognition based on multienvi-ronment sensor data. Information Fusion 91 (2023), 47–63. [75] Chuan-en Lin, Ta Ying Cheng, and Xiaojuan Ma. 2020. Architect: Building interactive virtual experiences from physical affordances by bringing human-in-the-loop. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–13. [76] Philippa Madill, Matthew Newton, Huanjun Zhao, Yichen Lian, Zachary McKendrick, Patrick Finn, Aditya Shekhar Nittala, and Ehud Sharlin. 2025. Playing with Robots: Performing Arts Techniques for Designing and Understanding Robot Group Movement. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–20. [77] Michael A Mahler, Qinghua Li, and Ang Li. 2017. SecureHouse: A home security system based on smartphone sensors. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications (PerCom) . IEEE, 11–20. [78] Nicolai Marquardt and Saul Greenberg. 2015. Proxemic interactions: From theory to practice . Morgan & Claypool Publishers. [79] John E Mathieu, Tonia S Heffner, Gerald F Goodwin, Eduardo Salas, and Janis A Cannon-Bowers. 2000. The influence of shared mental models on team process and performance. Journal of applied psychology 85, 2 (2000), 273. [80] Joseph E McGrath. 1991. Time, interaction, and performance (TIP) A Theory of Groups. Small group research 22, 2 (1991), 147–174. [81] Asaki Miura, Takashi Isezaki, and Kenji Suzuki. 2013. Social playware with an enhanced reach for facilitating group interaction. In CHI’13 extended abstracts on human factors in computing systems . 1155–1160. [82] Antti Oulasvirta, Sakari Tamminen, Virpi Roto, and Jaana Kuorelahti. 2005. Interaction in 4-second bursts: the fragmented nature of attentional resources in mobile HCI. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . 919–928. [83] Ziqi Pan, Xiucheng Zhang, Zisu Li, Zhenhui Peng, Mingming Fan, and Xiaojuan Ma. 2025. ACKnowledge: a computational framework for human compatible affordance-based interaction planning in real-world contexts. In 

Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–20. [84] Chang Sup Park and Barbara K Kaye. 2019. Smartphone and self-extension: Functionally, anthropomorphically, and ontologically extending self via the smartphone. Mobile Media & Communication 7, 2 (2019), 215–231. [85] Irene Poort, Ellen Jansen, and Adriaan Hofman. 2022. Does the group matter? Effects of trust, cultural diversity, and group formation on engagement in group work in higher education. Higher Education Research & Development 41, 2 (2022), 511–526. [86] Stefan Poslad. 2011. Ubiquitous computing: smart devices, environments and interactions . John Wiley & Sons. [87] Samantha Reig, Erica Principe Cruz, Melissa M. Powers, Jennifer He, Timothy Chong, Yu Jiang Tham, Sven Kratz, Ava Robinson, Brian A. Smith, Rajan Vaish, and Andrés Monroy-Hernández. 2023. Supporting Piggybacked Co-Located Leisure Activities via Augmented Reality. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Hamburg, Germany) (CHI ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 788, 15 pages. doi:10.1145/3544548.3580833 [88] Merle Reimann, Jesper van de Graaf, Nina van Gulik, Stephanie Van De Sanden, Tibert Verhagen, and Koen Hindriks. 2023. Social robots in the wild and the novelty effect. In International Conference on Social Robotics . Springer, 38–48. [89] David Roedl, Shaowen Bardzell, and Jeffrey Bardzell. 2015. Sustainable making? Balancing optimism and criticism in HCI discourse. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 22, 3 (2015), 1–27. [90] Marco C Rozendaal, Boudewijn Boon, and Victor Kaptelinin. 2019. Objects with intent: Designing everyday things as collaborative partners. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 26, 4 (2019), 1–33. , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Moving Phones, Active Peers: Animated Phones Facilitators in In-Person Group Discussion 41 

[91] Harvey Sacks, Emanuel A Schegloff, and Gail Jefferson. 1974. A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-taking for conversation. language 50, 4 (1974), 696–735. [92] Wilmar B Schaufeli and Arnold B Bakker. 2010. Defining and measuring work engagement: Bringing clarity to the concept. Work engagement: A handbook of essential theory and research 12, 2010 (2010), 10–24. [93] Trenton Schulz, Jim Torresen, and Jo Herstad. 2019. Animation techniques in human-robot interaction user studies: A systematic literature review. ACM Transactions on Human-Robot Interaction (THRI) 8, 2 (2019), 1–22. [94] Trenton Wade Schulz, Jo Herstad, and Jim Tørresen. 2018. Classifying human and robot movement at home and implementing robot movement using the slow in, slow out animation principle. International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems 11, 3&4 (2018), 234–244. [95] Ameneh Shamekhi, Q. Vera Liao, Dakuo Wang, Rachel K. E. Bellamy, and Thomas Erickson. 2018. Face Value? Exploring the Effects of Embodiment for a Group Facilitation Agent. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Montreal QC, Canada) (CHI ’18) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. doi:10.1145/3173574.3173965 [96] AG Sheard and AP Kakabadse. 2004. A process perspective on leadership and team development. Journal of Management Development 23, 1 (2004), 7–106. [97] Jocelyn Shen, Audrey Lee, Sharifa Alghowinem, River Adkins, Cynthia Breazeal, and Hae Won Park. 2025. Social Robots as Social Proxies for Fostering Connection and Empathy Towards Humanity. In 2025 20th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) . 989–999. doi:10.1109/HRI61500.2025.10973992 [98] Elaine Short and Maja J Mataric. 2017. Robot moderation of a collaborative game: Towards socially assistive robotics in group interactions. In 2017 26th IEEE international symposium on robot and human interactive communication (RO-MAN) . IEEE, 385–390. [99] Vygandas’ Vegas Simbelis, Pedro Ferreira, Elsa Vaara, Jarmo Laaksolahti, and Kristina Höök. 2016. Repurposing bits and pieces of the digital. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 840–851. [100] Herbert A Simon. 1996. Designing organizations for an information-rich world. International Library of Critical Writings in Economics 70 (1996), 187–202. [101] Catharina Vesterager Smedegaard. 2019. Reframing the role of novelty within social HRI: from noise to information. In 2019 14th ACM/IEEE international conference on human-robot interaction (HRI) . IEEE, 411–420. [102] Regina O Smith. 2008. The paradox of trust in online collaborative groups. Distance Education 29, 3 (2008), 325–340. [103] Yusnita Sokman, Ahmad Kamalrulzaman Othman, A Abdul Aziz, Mohd Hafizan Musa, Nurhafizah Azizan, and Noor Hanim Rahmat. 2023. Stages in group work: Is there a relationship among them. International Journal of Academic Research in Business and Social Sciences 13, 11 (2023), 2779–2799. [104] Robert Sommer. 1967. Small group ecology. Psychological bulletin 67, 2 (1967), 145. [105] Kenji Suzuki. 2014. Social Playware: Device-mediated social interaction for therapeutic activities. In The 23rd IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication . IEEE, 69–72. [106] Karen Tatarian, Marine Chamoux, Amit Kumar Pandey, and Mohamed Chetouani. 2021. Robot gaze behavior and proxemics to coordinate conversational roles in group interactions. In 2021 30th IEEE International Conference on Robot & Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN) . IEEE, 1297–1304. [107] Margaret L Traeger, Sarah Strohkorb Sebo, Malte Jung, Brian Scassellati, and Nicholas A Christakis. 2020. Vulnerable robots positively shape human conversational dynamics in a human–robot team. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117, 12 (2020), 6370–6375. [108] Bruce W Tuckman. 1965. Developmental sequence in small groups. Psychological bulletin 63, 6 (1965), 384. [109] Bruce W Tuckman and Mary Ann C Jensen. 1977. Stages of small-group development revisited. Group & organization studies 2, 4 (1977), 419–427. [110] Manas Tungare and Manuel Pérez-Quinones. 2008. It’s not what you have, but how you use it: Compromises in mobile device use. arXiv preprint arXiv:0801.4423 (2008). [111] Gustavo Umbelino, Matin Yarmand, Samuel Blake, Vivian Ta, Amy Luo, and Steven P Dow. 2021. Prototeams: Supporting team dating in co-located settings. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 4, CSCW3 (2021), 1–27. [112] Jacqueline Urakami and Katie Seaborn. 2023. Nonverbal cues in human–robot interaction: A communication studies perspective. ACM Transactions on Human-Robot Interaction 12, 2 (2023), 1–21. [113] Sebastian Vaida and D S, erban. 2021. Group development stages. A brief comparative analysis of various models. 

Studia Universitatis Babes-Bolyai, Psychologia-Paedagogia 66, 1 (2021), 91–110. [114] Piet Van den Bossche, Wim Gijselaers, Mien Segers, Geert Woltjer, and Paul Kirschner. 2011. Team learning: building shared mental models. Instructional science 39, 3 (2011), 283–301. [115] Michael James Walsh and Shannon Jay Clark. 2019. Co-Present Conversation as “Socialized Trance”: Talk, Involvement Obligations, and Smart-Phone Disruption. Symbolic Interaction 42, 1 (2019), 6–26. , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 42 Pan et al. 

[116] Richard T Watson, Gerardine DeSanctis, and Marshall Scott Poole. 1988. Using a GDSS to facilitate group consensus: Some intended and unintended consequences. Mis Quarterly (1988), 463–478. [117] MARK D Weber and THOMAS A Karman. 1991. Student group approach to teaching using Tuckman model of group development. Advances in Physiology Education 261, 6 (1991), S12. [118] Daniel M Wegner. 1987. Transactive memory: A contemporary analysis of the group mind. In Theories of group behavior . Springer, 185–208. [119] Susan A Wheelan and Claire Conway. 1991. Group development as a framework to understand and promote school readiness to engage in an organizational development project. Journal of Educational and Psychological Consultation 

2, 1 (1991), 59–71. [120] Robert Mearns Yerkes, John D Dodson, et al . 1908. The relation of strength of stimulus to rapidity of habit-formation. (1908). [121] Suhwoo Yoon, Soobin Kim, Gyeryeong Park, and Hajin Lim. 2024. Evaluating How Desktop Companion Robot Behaviors Influence Work Experience and Robot Perception. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI EA ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 132, 7 pages. doi:10.1145/3613905.3651027 [122] Alex Wuqi Zhang, Ting-Han Lin, Xuan Zhao, and Sarah Sebo. 2023. Ice-breaking technology: Robots and computers can foster meaningful connections between strangers through in-person conversations. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–14. [123] Xinghua Zhang, Haiyang Yu, Yongbin Li, Minzheng Wang, Longze Chen, and Fei Huang. 2024. The imperative of conversation analysis in the era of llms: A survey of tasks, techniques, and trends. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.14195 

(2024). [124] Zheng Zhang, Weirui Peng, Xinyue Chen, Luke Cao, and Toby Jia-Jun Li. 2025. LADICA: A Large Shared Display Interface for Generative AI Cognitive Assistance in Co-located Team Collaboration. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 147, 22 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713289 , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026.