Title: Theory Discovery in Social Networks: Automating ERGM Specification with Large Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.04306v1

Published Time: Thu, 05 Mar 2026 02:23:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# Theory Discovery in Social Networks: Automating ERGM Specification with Large Language Models 

## Yidan Sun, Mayank Kejriwal 

University of Southern California 

yidans@usc.edu, kejriwal@isi.edu 

Abstract 

Understanding how social networks form, whether through reciprocity, shared attributes, or triadic closure, is central to computational social science. Exponential Random Graph Models (ERGMs) offer a principled framework for testing such formation theories, but translating qualitative social hy-potheses into stable statistical specifications remains a signif-icant barrier, requiring expertise in both network theory and model estimation. We present F ORGE (Formation-Oriented Reasoning with Guarded ERGMs), a framework that uses large language models to automate this translation. Given a network and an informal description of the social context, FORGE proposes candidate formation mechanisms, validates them against feasibility and stability constraints, and iter-atively refines specifications using goodness-of-fit diagnos-tics. Evaluation across twelve benchmark networks, spanning schools, organizations, and online communication, shows that F ORGE converges in 10 of 12 cases; conditional on con-vergence, it achieves the best likelihood-based fit in 9 of 10 while meeting adequacy thresholds. By combining LLM-based proposals with statistical guardrails, F ORGE reduces the manual effort required for ERGM specification. 

## 1 Introduction 

Web and social systems routinely generate network data, including reply and mention graphs, repost cascades, com-munication networks, and collaboration ties (Borgatti et al. 2009; Newman 2003). Researchers study these networks to answer a question that precedes prediction: what so-cial and individual processes generate the observed global structure? In many contemporary systems, especially newly emerging or rapidly evolving platforms, this formation logic is not well understood. For example, on platforms like Red-dit or Twitter/X, high local clustering may reflect triadic closure, but it may also arise from algorithmic recommen-dation, shared interests, or participation in the same viral thread; similarly, frequent back-and-forth interactions may resemble reciprocity but in fact result from repeated replies to a high-visibility post rather than a direct interpersonal tie. When multiple mechanisms can plausibly produce the same network structure, and no single explanation can be assumed in advance, the core research task becomes theory discovery :

Copyright © 2026, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved. 

identifying and testing combinations of behaviors that could explain how the network forms. Exponential Random Graph Models (ERGMs) provide a likelihood-based framework for theory testing by represent-ing network formation hypotheses as explicit statistics in an exponential-family model (Wasserman and Pattison 1996; Robins et al. 2007; Lusher, Koskinen, and Robins 2013). ERGMs represent the probability of a network through statistics that correspond to theoretically grounded forma-tion processes, such as reciprocity, homophily, and closure. Each parameter quantifies how the local configuration of ties changes the conditional log-odds of a connection, allowing researchers to test whether specific social theories are sup-ported by the observed data. In this sense, ERGMs allow us to move from an informal description of individual-social dynamics to a falsifiable statistical theory of network forma-tion. However, the search for plausible theoretical explanations is often hindered by the difficulty of translating qualitative social concepts into stable statistical specifications (Hunter, Goodreau, and Handcock 2008; Schweinberger 2011). The space of candidate specifications grows rapidly even with a moderate term library, and many terms interact in ways that can produce degeneracy or unstable estimation (Hand-cock et al. 2003; Strauss and Ikeda 1990). Consequently, theory discovery with ERGMs often becomes an arduous, manual iteration, proposing a set of social mechanisms, at-tempting estimation, and revising the hypothesized theory based on diagnostics (Hunter et al. 2008; Lusher, Koskinen, and Robins 2013). Rather than a purely computational chal-lenge, specifying an ERGM represents the conceptual diffi-culty of finding a set of social rules that are both theoretically meaningful and statistically well-behaved. Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) pro-vide an opportunity to bridge this gap by mapping informal social descriptions to formal theoretical structures. Trained on large and diverse text corpora, including publicly avail-able Internet data and, depending on the model, additional licensed, human-created, or third-party datasets, LLMs can encode broad background knowledge about social interac-tion in many contexts (OpenAI 2023; Anthropic 2024). Re-cent work also shows that LLMs can generate or partic-ipate in relational settings that reproduce several canoni-cal network-formation principles, including homophily and 

> arXiv:2603.04306v1 [stat.CO] 4 Mar 2026

triadic closure, and can produce synthetic networks whose global properties (e.g., clustering and degree distribution) resemble empirical social networks (Papachristou and Yuan 2024; Chang et al. 2025). These findings suggest that an LLM may serve as a candidate theory discovery component: it can help enumerate plausible individual and social mech-anisms conditioned on network metadata and diagnostics, and propose corresponding ERGM terms. To ensure scien-tific validity, such proposals must be grounded in explicit statistical guardrails, including feasibility checks and stabil-ity constraints. Motivated by the need for principled theory discov-ery in complex systems, we introduce F ORGE (Formation-Oriented Reasoning with Guarded ERGMs), an end-to-end framework for discovering theoretically grounded ERGM specifications. As shown in Figure 1, given an observed network and an informal description, F ORGE proceeds in four stages. Stage I (Candidate Specification Generation) prompts an LLM with diagnostics and attribute metadata to propose candidate mechanisms and assemble ERGM speci-fications. Stage II (Screening and Model Selection) applies feasibility checks and fast screening to select a specification suitable for likelihood-based estimation. Stage III (Iterative Specification Refinement) refits the selected model and per-forms diagnostic-guided single-term edits under fixed stabil-ity constraints to improve adequacy. Stage IV (Post-hoc The-ory Interpretation) produces a concise summary that links the final fitted terms to standard mechanism families. Over-all, F ORGE uses language to propose and revise candidate mechanisms while enforcing explicit statistical guardrails. Specific contributions in this work are as follows: • We formulate theory discovery via ERGM specification as a constrained search problem over structural mechanisms and covariate effects. We introduce F ORGE , which inte-grates diagnostic-conditioned prompting with rule-based validation to produce estimable specifications. • Evaluation across twelve benchmark networks shows that FORGE converges in 10 of 12 cases; conditional on con-vergence, it achieves the best likelihood-based BIC f in 9 of 10 cases while meeting predefined goodness-of-fit ade-quacy thresholds. • We introduce a post-hoc theory-synthesis module that translates fitted specifications into concise explanations grounded in standard formation mechanisms, with eval-uation against deterministic term-to-mechanism reference mappings. 

## 2 Related Work 

ERGMs: Estimation and Specification. Exponential-family random graph models (ERGMs) extend early log-linear and Markov formulations of network data (Holland and Leinhardt 1981; Frank and Strauss 1986) and were for-malized for social networks by Wasserman and Pattison (Wasserman and Pattison 1996). Subsequent advances, in-cluding curved exponential families (Hunter and Handcock 2006; Snijders et al. 2006), constrained Monte Carlo likeli-hoods (Geyer and Thompson 1992), and MCMC-based esti-mation (Snijders 2002), made ERGMs practically estimable, with the statnet suite providing standard implementa-tions (Hunter et al. 2008; Handcock et al. 2008, 2010; Kriv-itsky et al. 2023). Model specification remains a core difficulty. Poorly chosen terms can produce degeneracy, where probabil-ity mass concentrates on unrealistic graphs (Strauss and Ikeda 1990; Handcock et al. 2003; Rinaldo, Fienberg, and Zhou 2009; Schweinberger 2011). Applied analyses there-fore rely on diagnostics and goodness-of-fit assessment (Hunter, Goodreau, and Handcock 2008; Robins et al. 2007; Goodreau 2007; Lusher, Koskinen, and Robins 2013). Spec-ification is typically iterative: propose terms, estimate with MCMC-MLE, evaluate diagnostics, and adjust until con-vergence (Hunter et al. 2008; Goodreau, Kitts, and Morris 2009). This process is computationally heavy and depends on expert judgment to balance fit, interpretability, and sta-bility. Efforts to reduce these costs include stepwise and stochas-tic searches (Hammami et al. 2022; El-Zaatari, Yu, and Kosorok 2024), alternative estimators such as MPLE and contrastive divergence (van Duijn, Gile, and Handcock 2009; Handcock, Raftery, and Tantrum 2007; Hummel, Hunter, and Handcock 2012), and simulation-based refine-ments (Schweinberger 2011). Penalized and Bayesian vari-ants introduce shrinkage, uncertainty quantification, and model comparison through marginal likelihoods (Desmarais and Cranmer 2012; Lee, Noh, and Oh 2019; Caimo and Friel 2011; Bouranis, Friel, and Maire 2018; Han et al. 2024). Information criteria and cross-validation aid compar-ison (Hunter, Goodreau, and Handcock 2008; Schmid and Hunter 2021) but emphasize statistical fit rather than the so-cial mechanisms underlying tie formation. 

Interpretation in Applied ERGMs. ERGMs link net-work structure to social theory through interpretable coef-ficients representing mechanisms such as homophily, reci-procity, triadic closure, and degree heterogeneity (Robins et al. 2007; Lusher, Koskinen, and Robins 2013). This framework grounds hypothesized social processes in ob-servable network structure. Applications span school and adolescent friendships (Goodreau 2007; Goodreau, Kitts, and Morris 2009), professional collaboration among lawyers (Lazega 2001), political and inter-organizational ties (Cran-mer and Desmarais 2011; Desmarais and Cranmer 2012; Lehmann and Desmarais 2022), and health-related risk net-works (Morris et al. 2008; Goodreau et al. 2012). Exten-sions handle bipartite (Wang et al. 2013), valued (Krivit-sky 2012), and degree-constrained networks (Thomas and Blitzstein 2013). These studies show how ERGMs identify mechanisms such as transitive closure in friendships or ho-mophily in alliances that explain network formation. Interpretation, however, remains manual and itera-tive. Analysts must anticipate mechanisms, select terms, and refine models through repeated diagnostics (Hunter, Goodreau, and Handcock 2008; Lusher, Koskinen, and Robins 2013; Schweinberger 2011). This demands exper-tise in both domain theory and ERGM estimation and be-comes harder when multiple mechanisms interact. Auto-mated searches and penalized or Bayesian methods improve scalability but act mainly as statistical optimizers, prioritiz-ing fit over substantive explanation. 

Large Language Models and Network Structure. Re-cent studies show that large language models (LLMs) en-code regularities relevant to network formation. LLMs re-cover collaboration ties from scientific text with high recall (Jeyaram, Ward, and Santolini 2024), and multi-agent simu-lations generate networks exhibiting closure and preferential attachment (Papachristou and Yuan 2024), with degree and clustering patterns resembling empirical systems (Chang et al. 2025). When prompted appropriately, LLMs produce networks with small-world and scale-free properties (Park et al. 2023; Papachristou and Yuan 2024), reflecting combi-nations of local processes. Beyond topology, LLMs infer so-cial mechanisms from text (Argyle et al. 2023; Gandhi, Pa-tel, and Pattison 2023) and encode domain knowledge about how relationships form and persist. To date, however, no work has examined whether LLMs can assist ERGM specification by translating diagnostics and domain knowledge into model terms, refining them via diagnostic feedback, or comparing LLM-guided specifica-tions against expert baselines. 

## 3 Theory and Problem Setup 

This section formalizes the statistical foundation of Expo-nential Random Graph Models (ERGMs) and states the problem addressed by F ORGE . We consider simple, static networks (binary ties, no self-loops) that may be directed or undirected, and treat node attributes X as fixed. 

ERGM specification. Let G = ( V, E, X ) denote an at-tributed network with node set V , edge set E, and node at-tributes X, where each attribute x ∈ X is a function map-ping nodes to values: x : V → X x. Here Xx may be cat-egorical (e.g., club membership) or numeric (e.g., age). We represent the network through a random adjacency matrix 

Y = ( Yij ) ∈ { 0, 1}n×n with n = |V |, where Yij = 1 indi-cates an edge from node i to node j. Finally, we denote an 

observed realization of a network as y. An ERGM is then expressed through the following specification: 

Pθ (Y = y | X) = exp θ⊤s(y) − ψ(θ; X) , (1) where s(y) is a vector of sufficient statistics summarizing structural and attribute-based features of the network, such as the number of edges, mutual ties, or within-group connec-tions, θ is the parameter vector, and ψ(θ; X) is a normalizing constant. 

Example. Consider the friendship network where students belong to two clubs. An example ERGM for this network can be written as: 

Pθ (Y = y | X) ∝ exp θ⊤s(y)

= exp 

n

θedges sedges (y) + θclosure sclosure (y)+ θhomophily shomophily (y)

o

. (2) Equation (2) includes a baseline edges term for the to-tal number of friendships, a closure term (e.g., a geomet-rically weighted shared-partner statistic) for the tendency of friends-of-friends to connect, and a homophily term for friendships between students in the same club. Terms that depend only on network structure, such as edges and clo-sure, are called endogenous , while those involving node at-tributes, such as club membership, are called exogenous .The conditional log-odds of a tie, given the rest of the network Y−ij , is 

logit Pθ (Yij = 1 | Y−ij = y−ij , X ) = θ⊤∆sij (y), (3) where ∆sij (y) = s(y+ 

> ij

) − s(y− 

> ij

) is the change in statis-tics when edge (i, j ) is toggled. Each coefficient scales the change-score of its corresponding statistic. For the friend-ship network, θhomophily > 0 indicates that same-club pairs have higher odds of friendship by a factor of eθhomophily , hold-ing other terms fixed. ERGM parameters are typically estimated using Markov Chain Monte Carlo Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MCMLE), which approximates ψ(θ; X) through simula-tion: 

∇θ ℓ(θ; y, X ) = s(y) − Eθ [s(Y )] . (4) The expectation is computed over simulated draws Y (b) ∼

Pθ (· | X). A faster but approximate alternative is the maximum pseudolikelihood estimator (MPLE), which treats edges as conditionally independent and provides initial esti-mates for large model spaces before full MCMC fitting. In most ERGM studies, the statistic vector s(y) is chosen manually through trial and error: fitting, diagnosing, and re-fitting until an adequate model is found (Hunter et al. 2008; Lusher, Koskinen, and Robins 2013; Goodreau, Kitts, and Morris 2009; Schweinberger 2011). This process is time-intensive, requires expertise, and becomes especially diffi-cult when theoretical guidance is limited or many candidate terms exist. For instance, reciprocity captures the tendency for mutual exchange ( i ↔ j), homophily represents the preference for similar others (e.g., same-grade friendships), and transitivity models triadic closure where a “friend of a friend” becomes a friend. Automatically discovering sta-ble and interpretable ERGM specifications remains an open problem: 

Problem statement. Given an observed network G =(V, E, X ) and an informal description Q, automatically construct an ERGM specification s⋆(·) that (i) is admissible under feasibility and stability constraints, (ii) can be reliably estimated without degeneracy, (iii) passes GOF-based ade-quacy checks when estimation converges, and (iv) remains interpretable in terms of standard mechanism families (e.g., reciprocity, homophily, closure, degree heterogeneity). 

In the next section, we present F ORGE , a novel frame-work for addressing the problem. As shown in Figure 1, given only an informal description of a social system and an observed network, F ORGE prompts an LLM in four stages to discover both a fully specified ERGM and an interpretive summary of the ERGM. 

3.1 Stage I: Candidate Specification Generation 

Specifying an ERGM requires selecting from a large set of structural and attribute terms. In networks with multiple at-tributes, the space of feasible combinations grows rapidly, Figure 1: The overall framework of F ORGE . Stage I ( Candidate Specification Generation ) uses network diagnostics and attribute information to prompt an LLM to propose candidate ERGM terms and assemble complete model specifications. Stage II (Screening and Model Selection ) evaluates these candidates using feasibility checks and fast MPLE screening, selecting a single specification for likelihood-based estimation. Stage III ( Iterative Specification Refinement ) refits and incrementally updates the selected model using goodness-of-fit diagnostics under fixed stability constraints to improve adequacy. Stage IV ( Post-hoc Theory Interpretation ) summarizes the final fitted specification in terms of recognizable social mechanisms such as reciprocity, triadic closure, and homophily. making exhaustive search infeasible, and many combina-tions yield degenerate or non-convergent models. Stage I ad-dresses this challenge by using the broad domain knowledge and reasoning capabilities of an LLM to produce a pool of candidate specifications. By conditioning on network diag-nostics and attribute metadata, the LLM identifies which la-tent social processes, such as specific forms of homophily or reciprocity, are most likely to drive tie formation in the given substantive context. The system first computes network diagnostics dG (e.g., size, density, degree distribution, clustering, and reciprocity) and extracts metadata mG (e.g., graph type and available node attributes). Based on this information, the system con-structs a reference term universe U(G), defined as the set of ERGM terms that are (i) implemented in the underly-ing ERGM library, (ii) compatible with the observed net-work type (directed vs. undirected, binary ties), and (iii) well-defined given the available node attributes. The uni-verse is constructed by enumerating standard ERGM term families commonly used in applied network analysis (e.g., baseline density, reciprocity, degree heterogeneity, shared-partner structure, and attribute-based effects), subject to fea-sibility and stability constraints. While U(G) does not in-clude all conceivable network statistics, it is near-exhaustive with respect to commonly used and estimable ERGM terms for the given network. 

Feasibility and stability conditions. Each candidate term must be compatible with the observed network’s structure and the available data. To ensure that all terms in U(G) are meaningful and estimable, three conditions are imposed: (i) terms that depend on directionality, such as reciprocity, are included only when the network is directed; (ii) attribute-based terms are applied only when their required attribute type is available (e.g., numeric covariates for continuous ef-fects; categorical attributes for homophily or mixing terms); (iii) all covariate and attribute data must correspond to valid nodes and edges so that statistics are well defined. 

LLM-based specification generation. While U(G) con-tains all technically valid terms, many may not be substan-tively relevant to tie formation in the specific context. To fo-cus on meaningful candidates, the system prompts the LLM via Plib to nominate terms it judges relevant for the described network, given diagnostics dG, metadata mG, and a textual description Q. (Prompt templates for each stage are detailed in Appendix A.) At this stage, we use the LLM’s extensive domain knowledge, acquired from its vast training corpora, to reason about the latent social logic governing the network. For example, Q might describe “a friendship network among students,” and the LLM’s reasoning capability allows it to in-fer that mechanisms like homophily and triadic closure are structurally more probable than in a random biological in-teraction network. This nomination step produces bL(G, Q ),which is then intersected with the reference universe to ob-tain bLadm = bL(G, Q ) ∩ U (G), ensuring that candidates are both technically valid and substantively grounded in social theory. Using bLadm , the system prompts the LLM via Pspec to propose complete model specifications. Term selection is guided by the LLM’s interpretation of observed diagnos-tics: it reasons that higher clustering coefficients suggest the inclusion of closure terms, while specific attribute meta-data may imply complex mixing patterns. By using the LLM as a “reasoning engine”, F ORGE can explore the high-dimensional space of theoretical configurations more effec-tively than brute-force search. Each combination of selected terms constitutes a distinct specification, representing a dif-ferent theoretical explanation of tie formation. 

Example. In a friendship network, diagnostics dG and metadata mG indicate a sparse, undirected graph with mod-erate clustering and strong assortativity by club. Given this information, the LLM nominates terms such as edges for baseline connectivity, a geometrically weighted closure term for triadic clustering, and a homophily term for within-club friendship preference. From these nominated terms, the LLM proposes several candidate specifications combining different subsets to capture alternative explanations of tie formation. The LLM outputs are parsed and canonicalized to pro-duce syntactically valid statnet specifications. The out-put is the candidate pool Scand , which passes to Stage II for statistical screening. 

3.2 Stage II: Screening and Model Selection 

Given the candidate pool Scand from Stage I, Stage II screens for statistical viability and selects a primary specification for likelihood-based refinement. This stage relies on the Maxi-mum Pseudolikelihood Estimator (MPLE), which provides fast approximate estimates to prune clearly unsuitable candi-dates before committing to expensive MCMC-based fitting. Before MPLE screening, each specification is checked for compatibility with the network structure. Candidates are dis-Algorithm 1: Stage I: Candidate Specification Generation                            

> Input: Network G= ( V, E, X ); optional query Q
> Output: Candidate pool Scand
> 1: dG←diag( G);mG←meta( G)
> 2: U(G)←EnumerateAdmissibleTerms (G)
> 3: bL ← M (Plib (dG, m G, Q ))
> 4: bLadm ←bL ∩ U (G)
> 5: Scand ← M (Pspec (bLadm , d G, Q ))
> 6: Canonicalize each s∈ S cand
> 7: return Scand

carded if they contain terms not in U(G), lack the baseline 

edges term, or include redundant or conflicting terms. 

MPLE pre-screen. We fit an edges-only model to obtain a baseline pseudo-BIC. For each surviving candidate s ∈Scand , we attempt an MPLE fit and compute 

BIC s(s) = −2 ℓPL (ˆθMPLE ; s) + k log( nd),

where ℓPL is the log-pseudolikelihood, k is the number of pa-rameters, and nd is the number of dyads. Specifications that fail to fit or do not improve on the baseline (i.e., BIC s(s) ≥

BIC s, 0) are discarded. We emphasize that BIC s is used only for efficient screening, not as the final basis for model com-parison, since MPLE can be biased in the presence of strong dyadic dependence. 

Early stability check. For each surviving specification, we run short simulations under the MPLE estimates. Can-didates are discarded if these simulations exhibit clear signs of instability, such as severe mismatch in edge density or ob-vious lack of mixing. This simulation-based check comple-ments the rule-based constraints in U(G) by detecting prob-lems that only manifest during estimation. From the screened pool Spool , we select the primary spec-ification 

s0 = arg min 

> s∈S pool

BIC s(s),

breaking ties in favor of fewer terms. The output of Stage II is s0 with its MPLE estimates, ready for likelihood-based refinement in Stage III. 

3.3 Stage III: Iterative Specification Refinement 

While Stage II produces a valid specification s0, it may re-main suboptimal if key structures are underfit, decay param-eters are poorly chosen, or redundant terms were included. Stage III refines this initial specification using likelihood-based estimation and goodness-of-fit (GOF) diagnostics. 

Diagnostic-guided refinement. Refinement proceeds it-eratively. At each iteration t, we compute GOF diagnos-tics for the current specification st, including degree dis-tribution, shared partners, and geodesic distances, and then pass these residual summaries to the LLM through an edit prompt Pedit (detailed prompt templates are provided in Ap-pendix A). At this stage, we specifically utilize the LLM’s reasoning capability to interpret statistical misfits. Rather than a purely score-driven search, the LLM draws on its Algorithm 2: Stage III: Diagnostic-Guided Single-Term Re-finement           

> Input: Screened pool Spool from Stage II; threshold τ; rounds T; fallback limit J
> Output: Refined specification s⋆

1: Sort Spool by increasing BIC s (ties broken by fewer terms) 

2: s0 ← null 

3: for j = 1 to min( J, |S pool |) do 

4: Attempt MCMLE refit of Spool [j]

5: if converges and non-degenerate then 

6: s0 ← S pool [j]; break 

7: end if 

8: end for 

9: if s0 = null then 

10: return failure 

11: end if 

12: t ← 0; rej ← 0; st ← s0

13: Compute BIC f (s0) and GOF 

14: while t < T and rej < 2 do 

15: Compute GOF for st and BIC f (st)

16: Prompt Pedit to propose single-term edit → candidate s′

17: Validate s′; fit using MCMLE; compute GOF and BIC f (s′)

18: pass t ← (max ℓ |zℓ(st)| < τ )

19: pass ′ ← (max ℓ |zℓ(s′)| < τ )

20: if s′ degenerate then 

21: Reject s′

22: else if pass t then 

23: Accept s′ iff pass ′ and BIC f (s′) < BIC f (st)

24: else 

25: Accept s′ iff max ℓ |zℓ(s′)| < max ℓ |zℓ(st)| and BIC f (s′) ≤ 

> BIC f(st)

26: end if 

27: if s′ accepted then 

28: st+1 ← s′; rej ← 0

29: else 

30: st+1 ← st; rej ← rej + 1 

31: end if 

32: t ← t + 1 

33: end while 

34: return s⋆ ← st

extensive knowledge of mechanism “symptoms” to rea-son about latent social processes. For instance, if the ob-served network has more clustering than the current specifi-cation predicts, the LLM reasons that missing closure mech-anisms, such as triadic interactions or shared-partner effects, might be responsible, subsequently proposing a geometri-cally weighted shared partner (GWSP) term. The LLM pro-poses a single modification, which involves adding, remov-ing, or substituting one term, and produces a candidate s′.The candidate s′ is validated using the same feasibility and stability rules as Stage I, then refit using MCMLE to compute GOF diagnostics and BIC f (s′).

Non-degeneracy check. A fitted candidate s′ is declared non-degenerate if MCMLE converges and the GOF simu-lations do not concentrate on near-empty or near-complete graphs. Specifically, using the simulated draws from GOF assessment, we require 

|mean( |Esim |) − | E|| ≤ ϵE , where ϵE = max(5 , 0.25 |E|).

Candidates that fail this check are rejected. 

Acceptance rule. Let adequacy be defined by 

max ℓ |zℓ(s)| ≤ τ with τ = 2.5, where zℓ is the stan-dardized residual for the ℓ-th GOF statistic. Edits are accepted as follows: • If st fails adequacy: accept s′ only if it improves GOF (smaller max ℓ |zℓ|) and does not increase BIC f .• If st passes adequacy: accept s′ only if s′ also passes adequacy and BIC f decreases. In all cases, s′ must be non-degenerate. Refinement runs for at most T = 4 rounds or until two consecutive rejections. The output is the refined specifica-tion s⋆ with MCMLE estimates, final GOF diagnostics, and an edit log. 

Fallback when s0 is not estimable under MCMLE. 

Stage III requires a likelihood-based refit of the Stage II win-ner s0. If the initial MCMLE refit of s0 fails to converge or is flagged as degenerate under the non-degeneracy check, we back off to the next-best candidate from the screened pool. Concretely, we sort Spool by increasing BIC s (breaking ties by fewer terms) and attempt MCMLE refits for the top J

candidates under the same fixed simulation controls. We ini-tialize Stage III from the first candidate that converges and passes the non-degeneracy check; if none of the top J candi-dates are admissible, we report failure and terminate refine-ment. We denote the resulting information criterion by BIC f

to distinguish it from the screening criterion BIC s used in Stage II. 

3.4 Stage IV: Post-hoc Theory Interpretation 

Following the selection of the refined specification s⋆ from Stage III, Stage IV produces an interpretive summary ex-plaining the fitted model in terms of recognizable social mechanisms. This stage relies on the LLM’s capacity for synthesis and explanation to ensure the model results are grounded in social theory. Given s⋆, its fitted coefficients ˆθ,and network metadata, we prompt the LLM with Ptheory to produce a short, human-readable summary describing how mechanisms such as reciprocity, triadic closure, and ho-mophily shape tie formation (detailed prompts are provided in Appendix A). Specifically, Ptheory instructs the LLM to (i) organize the summary by mechanism (e.g., reciprocity, triadic closure, homophily, degree heterogeneity), (ii) state for each whether it increases or decreases the log-odds of a tie and indicate relative strength using coefficient magnitude, and (iii) avoid inferential language (no p-values or confidence intervals) and restrict all claims to information contained in s⋆ and ˆθ.This stage is strictly post-hoc and does not affect esti-mation or selection. Its purpose is interpretive: to make the model more accessible to social scientists and to facilitate comparison with established theories in the literature. 

## 4 Evaluation 

Benchmark Networks Experiments cover 12 benchmark networks spanning multiple domains: school friendships (Faux Mesa, Faux Dixon, Faux Magnolia), organizational advice (Krackhardt Managers, Lazega Lawyers), workplace structure (Kapferer Tailor Shop), communication (Enron Email, Manufacturing Email), security (Noordin Top terror-ist network, aggregated from multiplex communication lay-ers into a single undirected binary network), and social sys-tems (Facebook Caltech36, Glasgow s50, Florentine Fami-lies). 

Baseline Methods We compare F ORGE against five base-lines that differ in how candidate specifications are gener-ated prior to the shared Stage I screens. M1 (Random-K) 

uniformly samples K = 3 terms at random from U(G)

plus the edges term, serving as a naive baseline. M2 (Null) 

fits a fixed edges-only model. M3 (One-shot) prompts the generator once to return a single specification with exactly four terms from U(G). M4 (Few-shot) extends M3 with one in-context example of a valid specification. M5 (Uncon-strained) allows the generator to propose any specification with K ∈ [3 , 8] terms; proposed terms are not required to come from U(G), but are subject to the same guardrails as all other candidates. For M5, off-menu terms may be proposed, but they are retained only if they pass the same type checks and are implementable under the ERGM term library; other-wise, they are discarded. In preliminary runs, a nontrivial fraction of raw candi-dates from M1–M5 were rejected by specification-level fea-sibility and stability checks (e.g., redundant or near-collinear statistics, invalid term combinations, or early signs of degen-eracy under simulation). This can prevent reliable estimation even when individual terms are admissible in isolation. To separate model-selection strategy from these shared estimation constraints, we apply the same Stage I guardrails to all methods prior to fitting. Concretely, every candi-date specification, regardless of how it is generated, is fil-tered using identical type checks and stability screens (term admissibility under U(G) when applicable, and the same specification-level filter Fspec ), and is then subjected to the same Stage II screening (MPLE screening and early simulation-based stability check). This standardizes the ad-missible candidate space across methods, so differences in downstream results reflect how methods generate and select specifications, rather than avoidable estimation failures. 

LLM Backends and Implementation For the Stage I generation and Stage II M3-M5 ablations, we evaluate five contemporary large language models as backends: GPT-4o, GPT-4o-mini, Claude 3.5 Sonnet, Gemini 2.5 Pro, and Llama 3.1–70B. All inference uses deterministic decoding (temperature =0) to ensure reproducibility of model pro-posals and selection decisions. MCMC sampling parame-ters, which include burn-in length, thinning interval, and total sample size, are tuned to network scale but held con-stant across all models within each dataset. Computational budgets are standardized and evenly divided among LLM prompting, ERGM estimation, and diagnostic simulation. 

Evaluation Protocol We evaluate F ORGE across four di-mensions aligned with its four stages: specification validity, model adequacy, refinement effectiveness, and interpretive accuracy. (1) Specification Validity. We define a rule-based admissi-ble universe U(G) independent of the LLM, as defined in Section 3.1. Given LLM nominations bL(G, Q ), we com-pute precision = | bL ∩ U (G)|/| bL| and recall = | bL ∩ U(G)|/|U (G)|. We also report offmenu = | bL \ U (G)|/| bL| 

as the fraction of nominated terms rejected by the term-level admissibility filter. Metrics are computed per network and then averaged across networks, so algebraic identities need not hold exactly after averaging. Each proposed specifica-tion is further checked for type correctness and parsimony (3–8 terms). (2) Model Adequacy. We use a two-step protocol aligned with computational constraints. First, each method gener-ates a pool of candidate specifications and we apply Stage II screening using MPLE, selecting a within-method winner based on pseudo-BIC (denoted BIC s). For LLM-guided methods (M3–M5), we repeat this screening across five LLM backends and retain the backend–specification pair with the best screening score. Second, we refit the MPLE-selected specification using full MCMLE under fixed simulation settings and compute likelihood-based BIC (denoted BIC f ). We report (i) conver-gence status, (ii) GOF pass/fail under the unified adequacy threshold, and (iii) the final BIC f for converged refits. BIC s

is used only for Stage II screening and BIC f is used only to summarize likelihood-based refits; we do not compare BIC s

and BIC f numerically across stages. (3) Refinement Effectiveness. We evaluate the impact of Stage III diagnostic-guided refinement by comparing the ”best-of-screening” specification (selected via BIC s in Stage II) against the final refined specification. Effective-ness is measured by: (i) the relative reduction in BIC f post-refinement, and (ii) the reduction in GOF misfit as measured by the maximum absolute standardized residual max ℓ |zℓ|

under the unified adequacy criterion. (4) Interpretive Accuracy. To evaluate the faithfulness of Stage IV summaries, we construct a ground-truth mapping between the ERGM term library and four mechanism fami-lies: reciprocity, closure, homophily, and degree heterogene-ity. For each fitted model, we treat the set of mechanisms implied by its fitted terms as the reference. We then per-form a multi-label evaluation of the LLM-generated sum-maries: (i) Structural precision/recall measures whether the LLM correctly identifies the mechanisms present; (ii) 

Directional accuracy checks if the summary correctly at-tributes the sign of the effect; and (iii) Overreach (halluci-nation) and Omission rates track if the model claims mech-anisms not supported by any term, or fails to identify fit-ted ones. These metrics ensure that the “theory synthesis” is grounded in the estimated model. 

Reproducibility. The implementation of F ORGE , includ-ing prompts, evaluation scripts, and processed benchmark datasets, will be released as open-source upon publication. 

4.1 Results and Discussion 

Finding 1: F ORGE improves likelihood-based fit after refinement. Across twelve benchmark networks, F ORGE 

outperformed baselines (M1–M5) under likelihood-based MCMLE evaluation (Table 1). Under fixed MCMC controls, Table 1: MCMLE evaluation across twelve networks showing BIC improvements over Null baseline. M1 = Random-(K), M2 = Null (baseline), and M3–M5 are LLM-guided baselines. For M3–M5, we first select a single specification using fast MPLE screening across LLM backends, then refit using MCMLE. F ORGE applies Stage III refinement to the best MPLE-selected specification. Bold marks best among M1–M5. NC = MCMLE did not converge.                                                                                 

> Baselines: MCMLE BIC f(% improvement over Null) Refinement Dataset M1 M2 (Null) M3 M4 M5 Forge III
> Faux Mesa 2,216 (3.5%) 2,296 1,536 1,491 1,508 (34.3%) 1,447 (37.0%) Faux Dixon 7,741 (10.7%) 8,672 6,177 (28.8%) 6,270 6,362 6,172 (28.8%) Faux Magnolia 12,727 (18.4%) 15,594 11,304 11,139 10,975 (29.6%) 10,967 (29.7%) Krackhardt Managers 515 (11.8%) 584 535 526 518 518 (11.3%) Lazega Lawyers 6,111 (1.7%) 6,215 4,245 4,182 4,121 (33.7%) 4,083 (34.3%) Kapferer Tailor Shop 4,120 (0.7%) 4,150 3,396 3,364 3,347 (19.4%) 3,321 (20.0%) Enron Email NC 17,319 NC NC NC NC
> Manufacturing Email 6,800 (1.6%) 6,910 6,810 6,768 6,744 (2.4%) 6,729 (2.6%) Caltech36 NC 103,971 NC NC NC NC
> Noordin Top 1,386 (6.9%) 1,489 1,091 1,075 1,059 (28.9%) 949 (36.3%) Glasgow s50 922 (0.2%) 924 636 629 623 (32.6%) 545 (41.0%) Florentine Families 122 (7.6%) 132 123 121 120 (9.1%) 101 (23.5%)

Note. Values show BIC f from MCMLE with percentage improvement over Null in parentheses, computed as 100 × (BIC Null −

BIC method )/BIC Null . Positive percentages indicate better fit. Bold marks best among M1–M5. NC = did not converge. 

Figure 2: Term proposal performance across five LLMs. Pre-cision measures the fraction of proposed terms that are ad-missible; recall measures the fraction of admissible terms proposed; off-menu rate is the fraction of proposals violat-ing feasibility or stability constraints. FORGE converged in 10 of 12 networks (Caltech36 and En-ron Email did not converge). Among the converged datasets, FORGE met the unified GOF adequacy criterion defined in Section 3.3 and attained the lowest BIC f in 9 of 10 cases, with Krackhardt Managers as the only exception. The largest gains relative to the best MPLE-selected baseline occurred in Noordin Top (1,059 → 949) and Glasgow s50 (623 →

545). These improvements come from constrained single-term edits guided by GOF mismatches. When misfit was detected, refinement most often introduced geometrically weighted degree or shared-partner terms to address degree hetero-geneity and transitivity, and typically terminated within two to three iterations once adequacy was reached. For Krack-hardt Managers, the Stage II specification already satisfied GOF adequacy, so refinement correctly preserved it without modification. 

Finding 2: LLM-guided generation produces admissi-ble specifications after filtering. Stage I prompts LLMs to nominate candidate ERGM terms bL(G, Q ), which are then filtered against the rule-based admissible universe 

U(G). Across twelve benchmark networks, Gemini 2.5 Pro achieved the highest overall balance of precision (0.93) and recall (0.82), with the lowest off-menu rate (0.08) (Figure 2). GPT-4o maintained comparably high precision (0.90) but substantially lower recall (0.22), while Llama-3.1–70B ex-hibited a higher off-menu rate (0.39), primarily due to type mismatches (e.g., proposing mutual for undirected graphs) and inadmissible attribute instantiations filtered by stability rules. After filtering, all retained specifications satisfied the same structural guardrails. Flexible prompts yielded spec-ifications with 5–7 terms on average, while fixed-length prompts returned the instructed number of terms. These re-sults show that LLM nomination combined with rule-based filtering reliably produces well-formed, estimable ERGM specifications prior to likelihood-based fitting. 

Finding 3: Post-hoc LLM synthesis accurately reflects fitted mechanisms. Stage IV translates fitted ERGM specifications into mechanism-oriented summaries orga-nized by reciprocity, closure, homophily, and degree het-erogeneity. To reduce scale artifacts, the synthesis prompt instructs the model to interpret effects using typical change statistics (log-odds impact of a single tie toggle) rather than raw coefficient magnitudes. Across benchmark networks, Claude 3.5 Sonnet and GPT-4o achieved the highest precision and directional accuracy in mechanism synthesis (Table 2). Gemini 2.5 Pro and Llama-3.1–70B showed lower recall, primarily due to omissions in attribute-rich models with overlapping mechanisms. Com-mon errors across backends involved conflating degree het-erogeneity with popularity-related effects. Overall, when constrained by fitted terms and change-statistic reasoning, LLMs provide faithful summaries of ERGM mechanisms. Table 2: Stage IV theory synthesis performance across language model backends. Values show the range (mini-mum–maximum) across twelve benchmark networks.                                 

> Backend Precision Recall F1 Directional Accuracy κ
> Claude 3.5 Sonnet 0.89–0.93 0.82–0.88 0.85–0.90 0.91–0.95 0.78–0.84 GPT-4o 0.88–0.92 0.81–0.87 0.84–0.89 0.90–0.94 0.77–0.83 Gemini 2.5 Pro 0.83–0.88 0.74–0.81 0.76–0.82 0.86–0.91 0.69–0.76 Llama-3.1-70B 0.79–0.85 0.66–0.73 0.69–0.76 0.81–0.87 0.62–0.70 GPT-4o-mini 0.85–0.89 0.77–0.83 0.80–0.85 0.87–0.92 0.72–0.79
> Overreach: 0.07–0.11 Omission: 0.12–0.18
> Note. Overreach is the fraction of mechanism labels stated by the model that are not supported by any fitted term; omission is the fraction of fitted term families not mentioned in the expla-nation.

Interpretable ERGMs Discovered by F ORGE To illus-trate the output of F ORGE , we report the final ERGM spec-ifications selected for two benchmark networks (Figure 3). These examples show that the framework yields estimable models whose included terms correspond to standard struc-tural and attribute-based mechanisms commonly used in ERGM analysis. 

Noordin Top terrorist network. For the Noordin Top net-work, F ORGE selects a six-term specification that combines endogenous dependence terms with node-level attributes. The inclusion of gwesp and gwdsp indicates the pres-ence of triadic dependence and shared-partner effects, con-sistent with local clustering and cell-based organization. The 

nodematch(group) term indicates a strong tendency for ties to occur within the same organizational unit. In addition, the nodefactor(status) term allows for differences in tie incidence across operative roles, reflecting hetero-geneity associated with functional positions such as bomb-makers or recruiters. Finally, absdiff(comm degree) 

implies that ties are more likely between operatives with similar levels of communication activity, indicating assor-tative mixing on communication intensity. 

Glasgow s50 social network. When the Glasgow s50 ado-lescent friendship network is modeled as directed, F ORGE 

converges to a five-term specification primarily composed of structural terms. The mutual term reflects a high rate of reciprocated nominations, indicating that named friend-ships are frequently returned. The joint inclusion of gwesp 

and gwdsp reflects transitive closure and shared-friend de-pendence, consistent with the formation of tightly connected peer groups. The gwidegree term allows for heterogene-ity in in-degree, indicating that a small number of stu-dents receive a large number of friendship nominations. No attribute-based effects (e.g., sex, smoking, or substance use) remain in the final specification, suggesting that observed network structure is sufficient to account for the main fea-tures of tie formation in this setting. 

Discussion Our results indicate that large language mod-els can assist ERGM specification when embedded in an es-timation workflow with explicit feasibility and stability con-straints. Across most benchmarks, F ORGE generates type-correct candidates after filtering, and Stage III refinement yields stable likelihood-based fits in most cases under fixed MCMC controls. The case studies further show that the re-sulting specifications fall within standard mechanism fam-ilies (e.g., reciprocity, shared-partner structure, degree het-erogeneity, and attribute-based effects), supporting the claim that the final models remain interpretable rather than purely score-driven. A practical advantage of F ORGE is the guarded interface that links informal descriptions and diagnostics to concrete ERGM terms while preventing invalid or high-risk speci-fications from entering likelihood-based estimation. Unlike traditional search procedures that optimize a fixed objective over a predefined term set, the nomination step can prior-itize domain-plausible mechanisms using contextual cues, with rule-based universe and stability checks enforcing sta-tistical constraints. This design uses language for proposal generation without delegating estimation to the LLM. The experiments also show clear limits. Some specifica-tions do not converge under the same MCMC controls as simpler baselines, especially in larger or heterogeneous net-works where small edits can increase dependence and slow mixing. We treat non-convergence as a hard rejection for consistent evaluation, but this can block further refinement in difficult cases. In addition, strict feasibility and stability rules can prevent reproducing some published ERGMs when preprocessing choices or parameterizations imply statistics that violate our guardrails, reflecting a trade-off between conservative constraints and fitting more complex formula-tions. 

## 5 Conclusion 

We introduce F ORGE , an end-to-end framework for au-tomated ERGM specification that combines LLM-guided nomination with feasibility/stability validation, MPLE screening, likelihood-based refinement, and mechanism-oriented interpretation. Across twelve benchmark networks, FORGE converges in 10 of 12 cases under fixed MCMC controls and, conditional on convergence, achieves the best likelihood-based BIC f in most datasets while meeting the predefined GOF threshold. Overall, the results show that an LLM can contribute to ERGM specification when coupled with explicit constraints and diagnostic-guided refinement. Future work will improve robustness in difficult networks by adapting simulation controls during Stage III and allow-ing multi-term edits when diagnostics indicate systematic misfit. We also plan extensions to longitudinal, multi-layer, and bipartite settings, and support user-registered statistics with explicit computation logic and stability constraints. 

## References 

Anthropic. 2024. Claude 4 System Card. System card, An-thropic. Provides safety, training data overview, and model behavior documentation. Argyle, L. P.; Busby, E. C.; Fulda, N.; Gubler, J. R.; Rytting, C.; and Wingate, D. 2023. Out of one, many: Using lan-(a) Noordin Top terrorist network            

> ERGM specification
> edges +gwesp(0.5) +gwdsp(0.5) +nodematch(group)
> +nodefactor(status) +absdiff(comm_degree)
> Term Mechanism
> edges
> Baseline density
> gwesp(0.5)
> Triadic closure
> gwdsp(0.5)
> Shared partners
> nodematch(group)
> Within-group ties
> nodefactor(status)
> Role heterogeneity
> absdiff(comm_degree)
> Communication similarity
> Interpretation
> Relationships cluster into tight-knit cells operatives who share
> partners tend to connect. Members strongly prefer ties within their
> own organizational unit. Certain roles (e.g., bomb-makers, recruiters)
> attract disproportionately many ties, and those with similar
> communication levels are more likely to collaborate. The network is
> organized around specialized cells and differentiated roles.

(b) Glasgow s50 social network (directed)           

> ERGM specification
> edges +gwesp(0.25) +gwdsp(0.25) +mutual
> +gwidegree(0.25)
> Term Mechanism
> edges
> Baseline density
> gwesp(0.25)
> Triadic closure
> gwdsp(0.25)
> Shared partners
> mutual
> Reciprocity
> gwidegree(0.25)
> In-degree heterogeneity
> Interpretation
> Friendships are strongly reciprocal if you name someone as a friend,
> they very likely name you back. Ties cluster into tight peer groups
> with shared friends. A few popular students attract many nominations,
> creating visible social hierarchy. Notably, none of the measured
> attributes (sex, smoking, etc.) predict friendship once structure is
> accounted for social structure alone explains connectivity.

Figure 3: Outputs produced by F ORGE for two benchmark networks. Each panel reports the final ERGM specification returned by the framework, together with the associated mapping from ERGM terms to network mechanisms and their substantive interpretation. (a) Noordin Top terrorist network. (b) Glasgow s50 social network (directed). guage models to simulate human samples. Political Analy-sis , 31(3): 337–351. Borgatti, S. P.; Mehra, A.; Brass, D. J.; and Labianca, G. 2009. Network analysis in the social sciences. science ,323(5916): 892–895. Bouranis, L.; Friel, N.; and Maire, F. 2018. Bayesian auxil-iary variable models for exponential random graphs. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 27(2): 320–333. Caimo, A.; and Friel, N. 2011. Bayesian inference for ex-ponential random graph models. Social Networks , 33(1): 41–55. Chang, S.; Chaszczewicz, A.; Wang, E.; Josifovska, M.; Pierson, E.; and Leskovec, J. 2025. LLMs generate struc-turally realistic social networks but overestimate political homophily. In Proceedings of the International AAAI Con-ference on Web and Social Media , volume 19, 198–210. Menlo Park, CA: AAAI Press. Cranmer, S. J.; and Desmarais, B. A. 2011. Inferential net-work analysis with exponential random graph models. Po-litical Analysis , 19(1): 66–86. Desmarais, B. A.; and Cranmer, S. J. 2012. Statistical me-chanics of networks: Estimation and uncertainty. Physical Review E , 86(3): 036104. El-Zaatari, H.; Yu, F.; and Kosorok, M. R. 2024. Stochas-tic step-wise feature selection for exponential random graph models (ergms). PloS one , 19(12): e0314557. Frank, O.; and Strauss, D. 1986. Markov graphs. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 81(395): 832–842. Gandhi, D.; Patel, C.; and Pattison, P. 2023. Social learning in communication networks. Complexity , 2023: 1–15. Geyer, C. J.; and Thompson, E. A. 1992. Constrained Monte Carlo maximum likelihood for dependent data. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological) ,54(3): 657–699. Goodreau, S. M. 2007. Advances in exponential random graph (p*) models applied to a large social network. Social Networks , 29(2): 231–248. Goodreau, S. M.; Carnegie, N. B.; Vittinghoff, E.; Lama, J. R.; Sanchez, J.; Grinsztejn, B.; Koblin, B. A.; Mayer, K. H.; and Buchbinder, S. P. 2012. Bridging tie models for HIV transmission among MSM. Epidemiology , 23(5): 631– 639. Goodreau, S. M.; Kitts, J. A.; and Morris, M. 2009. Birds of a feather, or friend of a friend? Using exponential random graph models to investigate adolescent social networks. De-mography , 46(1): 103–125. Hammami, P.; Widgren, S.; Grosbois, V.; Apolloni, A.; Rose, N.; and Andraud, M. 2022. Complex network anal-ysis to understand trading partnership in French swine pro-duction. PloS one , 17(4): e0266457. Han, D.; Modisette, V.; Forthofer, M.; and Paul, R. 2024. Hi-erarchical Bayesian adaptive lasso methods on exponential random graph models. Applied Network Science , 9(1): 9. Handcock, M. S.; Hunter, D. R.; Butts, C. T.; Goodreau, S. M.; and Morris, M. 2008. Statnet: Software tools for the representation, visualization, analysis and simulation of network data. Journal of Statistical Software , 24(1): 1548– 7660. Handcock, M. S.; Hunter, D. R.; Butts, C. T.; Goodreau, S. M.; and Morris, M. 2010. statnet: Software Tools for the Statistical Modeling of Network Data . R package version 2010.01. Handcock, M. S.; Raftery, A. E.; and Tantrum, J. M. 2007. Model-based clustering for social networks. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society) ,170: 301–354. Handcock, M. S.; Robins, G.; Snijders, T.; Moody, J.; and Besag, J. 2003. Assessing degeneracy in statistical models of social networks. Technical report, Working paper. Holland, P. W.; and Leinhardt, S. 1981. An exponential fam-ily of probability distributions for directed graphs. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 76(373): 33–50. Hummel, R. M.; Hunter, D. R.; and Handcock, M. S. 2012. Improving simulation-based algorithms for network models. 

Statistical Science , 27(2): 273–291. Hunter, D. R.; Goodreau, S. M.; and Handcock, M. S. 2008. Goodness of fit of social network models. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 103(481): 248–258. Hunter, D. R.; and Handcock, M. S. 2006. Inference in curved exponential family models for networks. Journal of computational and graphical statistics , 15(3): 565–583. Hunter, D. R.; Handcock, M. S.; Butts, C. T.; Goodreau, S. M.; and Morris, M. 2008. ergm: A package to fit, sim-ulate and diagnose exponential-family models for networks. 

Journal of statistical software , 24: 1–29. Jeyaram, R.; Ward, R. N.; and Santolini, M. 2024. Large language models recover scientific collaboration networks from text. Applied Network Science , 9(1): 64. Krivitsky, P. N. 2012. Exponential-family random graph models for valued networks. Electronic Journal of Statis-tics , 6: 1100–1128. Krivitsky, P. N.; Hunter, D. R.; Morris, M.; and Klumb, C. 2023. ergm 4: New Features for Analyzing Exponential-Family Random Graph Models. Journal of Statistical Soft-ware , 105(6): 1–44. Lazega, E. 2001. The collegial phenomenon: The social mechanisms of cooperation among peers in a corporate law partnership . Oxford University Press. Lee, S.; Noh, H.; and Oh, H. 2019. Penalized likelihood approaches for exponential random graph models. Social Networks , 59: 140–153. Lehmann, D. R.; and Desmarais, B. A. 2022. Campaign finance networks and policy outcomes. Political Analysis ,30(3): 404–423. Lusher, D.; Koskinen, J.; and Robins, G. 2013. Exponential random graph models for social networks: Theory, methods, and applications . Cambridge University Press. Morris, M.; Kurth, A. E.; Hamilton, D. T.; Moody, J.; and Wakefield, S. 2008. Concurrent partnerships and HIV preva-lence disparities by race: Linking science and public health practice. American Journal of Public Health , 99(6): 1023– 1031. Newman, M. E. 2003. The structure and function of complex networks. SIAM review , 45(2): 167–256. OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4 System Card. System card, Ope-nAI. Describes model capabilities, limitations, and high-level training data sources. Papachristou, M.; and Yuan, Y. 2024. Network forma-tion and dynamics among multi-llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10659 .Park, J. S.; O’Brien, J. C.; Cai, C. J.; Morris, M. R.; Liang, P.; and Bernstein, M. S. 2023. Generative agents: Interac-tive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , 1–22. Rinaldo, A.; Fienberg, S. E.; and Zhou, Y. 2009. Improving maximum likelihood estimation for social network models. 

Annals of Applied Statistics , 3(2): 494–512. Robins, G.; Pattison, P.; Kalish, Y.; and Lusher, D. 2007. An introduction to exponential random graph (p*) models for social networks. Social networks , 29(2): 173–191. Schmid, C. S.; and Hunter, D. R. 2021. Model selection for exponential random graph models: A cross-validation ap-proach. Social Networks , 64: 72–85. Schweinberger, M. 2011. Instability, sensitivity, and degen-eracy of discrete exponential families. Journal of the Amer-ican Statistical Association , 106(496): 1361–1370. Snijders, T. A. 2002. Markov chain Monte Carlo estima-tion of exponential random graph models. Journal of Social Structure , 3(2): 1–40. Snijders, T. A. B.; Pattison, P. E.; Robins, G. L.; and Hand-cock, M. S. 2006. New specifications for exponential ran-dom graph models. Sociological Methodology , 36(1): 99– 153. Strauss, D.; and Ikeda, M. 1990. Pseudolikelihood estima-tion for social networks. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 85(409): 204–212. Thomas, A.; and Blitzstein, J. 2013. Exponential-family models for random multigraphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.4492 .van Duijn, M. A.; Gile, K. J.; and Handcock, M. S. 2009. Pseudolikelihood estimation for social networks with degree-based constraints. Social Networks , 31(1): 52–63. Wang, P.; Robins, G.; Pattison, P.; and Lazega, E. 2013. Ex-ponential random graph models for multilevel networks. So-cial Networks , 35(1): 96–115. Wasserman, S.; and Pattison, P. 1996. Logit models and lo-gistic regressions for social networks: I. An introduction to Markov graphs and p. Psychometrika , 61(3): 401–425. 

5.1 Paper Checklist 

1. For most authors... (a) Would answering this research question advance sci-ence without violating social contracts, such as violat-ing privacy norms, perpetuating unfair profiling, exac-erbating the socio-economic divide, or implying disre-spect to societies or cultures? Yes (b) Do your main claims in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Yes, the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the Forge framework and evaluation results. (c) Do you clarify how the proposed methodological ap-proach is appropriate for the claims made? Yes, we combine LLM nomination with statistical guardrails to ensure valid ERGM specification. (d) Do you clarify what are possible artifacts in the data used, given population-specific distributions? Yes, we utilize standard benchmark networks widely used in the ERGM literature. (e) Did you describe the limitations of your work? Yes, see Discussion regarding convergence and simulation limits. (f) Did you discuss any potential negative societal im-pacts of your work? We identify risks associated with automated ERGM specification—such as the potential for over-interpretation of LLM-nominated mechanisms—and mitigate these through statistical guardrails like screening and iterative refinement. (g) Did you discuss any potential misuse of your work? We address potential misuse by emphasizing that FORGE is intended to assist, not replace, expert analy-sis. (h) Did you describe steps taken to prevent or mitigate po-tential negative outcomes of the research, such as data and model documentation, data anonymization, re-sponsible release, access control, and the reproducibil-ity of findings? We mitigate reliability risks through rigorous diagnostic checks, use anonymized bench-marks, and provide full reproducibility details. (i) Have you read the ethics review guidelines and en-sured that your paper conforms to them? Yes. 2. Additionally, if your study involves hypotheses testing... (a) Did you clearly state the assumptions underlying all theoretical results? N/A (b) Have you provided justifications for all theoretical re-sults? N/A (c) Did you discuss competing hypotheses or theories that might challenge or complement your theoretical re-sults? N/A (d) Have you considered alternative mechanisms or expla-nations that might account for the same outcomes ob-served in your study? N/A (e) Did you address potential biases or limitations in your theoretical framework? N/A (f) Have you related your theoretical results to the exist-ing literature in social science? Yes, we relate ERGM terms to social mechanisms established in previous lit-erature. (g) Did you discuss the implications of your theoretical results for policy, practice, or further research in the social science domain? Yes, we discuss the practical implications for automated network science. 3. Additionally, if you are including theoretical proofs... (a) Did you state the full set of assumptions of all theoret-ical results? N/A (b) Did you include complete proofs of all theoretical re-sults? N/A 4. Additionally, if you ran machine learning experiments... (a) Did you include the code, data, and instructions needed to reproduce the main experimental results (ei-ther in the supplemental material or as a URL)? Yes, instructions and data references are provided in the main text. (b) Did you specify all the training details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters, how they were chosen)? Yes, we specify the MCMLE settings and fixed simulation con-trols in Section 4. (c) Did you report error bars (e.g., with respect to the ran-dom seed after running experiments multiple times)? We report outcome consistency across five LLM back-ends. (d) Did you include the total amount of compute and the type of resources used (e.g., type of GPUs, internal cluster, or cloud provider)? Yes, we discuss the use of LLM APIs and fixed estimation settings. (e) Do you justify how the proposed evaluation is suf-ficient and appropriate to the claims made? Yes, we use standardized BIC and GOF metrics established in ERGM research. (f) Do you discuss what is “the cost“ of misclassification and fault (in)tolerance? We discuss the impact of non-convergence and model degeneracy. 5. Additionally, if you are using existing assets (e.g., code, data, models) or curating/releasing new assets, without compromising anonymity ... (a) If your work uses existing assets, did you cite the creators? Yes, all datasets and software packages are cited. (b) Did you mention the license of the assets? Datasets and packages are individually cited with their respec-tive licenses (e.g., GPL, Creative Commons) reported where available. (c) Did you include any new assets in the supplemental material or as a URL? No new assets were curated. (d) Did you discuss whether and how consent was ob-tained from people whose data you’re using/curating? N/A. We use public, anonymized benchmarks. (e) Did you discuss whether the data you are using/curat-ing contains personally identifiable information or of-fensive content? Datasets are anonymized and estab-lished for public research. (f) If you are curating or releasing new datasets, did you discuss how you intend to make your datasets FAIR? N/A (g) If you are curating or releasing new datasets, did you create a Datasheet for the Dataset? N/A 6. Additionally, if you used crowdsourcing or conducted research with human subjects, without compromising anonymity ... (a) Did you include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots? N/A (b) Did you describe any potential participant risks, with mentions of Institutional Review Board (IRB) ap-provals? N/A (c) Did you include the estimated hourly wage paid to participants and the total amount spent on participant compensation? N/A (d) Did you discuss how data is stored, shared, and dei-dentified? N/A A Appendix: Prompt Templates 

This appendix provides the full prompt templates used in FORGE . Placeholders denoted by {{·}} (e.g., {{ Q}} ) are populated during the framework execution with observed data and diagnostics. 

A.1 Prompt 1: Term Nomination 

System Role: You are an expert in network science and sta-tistical network models, with specific knowledge of Expo-nential Random Graph Models (ERGMs) and social network formation. 

Task: Identify ERGM terms that plausibly correspond to formation mechanisms based on a natural language descrip-tion, node/tie metadata, and structural statistics. 

Instructions: 

• Focus on substantive relevance, not formal admissibility. • Do not enumerate all possible ERGM terms. • Do not propose terms that are substantively meaningless in this context. • Think in terms of mechanisms (e.g., reciprocity, closure, degree heterogeneity, homophily, exposure). 

Output Format: Return a list of terms with term name ,

mechanism , and justification .

A.2 Prompt 2: Specification Proposal 

System Role: You are an expert in ERGM specification and model construction. 

Task: Construct multiple candidate ERGM specifications using only the provided candidate terms. 

Instructions: 

• Each specification should correspond to a coherent for-mation hypothesis. • Vary the combination of mechanisms across specifica-tions. • Prefer simpler specifications when possible. 

Output Format: Return a list of specifica-tions, each with spec id , included terms , and 

formation interpretation .

A.3 Prompt 3: Diagnostic-Guided Refinement 

System Role: You are an expert in ERGM specification refinement and goodness-of-fit (GOF) diagnostics. You do NOT estimate models and you do NOT evaluate model qual-ity. 

Task: Propose one and only one local edit to the specifica-tion (add, remove, or replace) based on mismatches visible in the GOF summary. 

Instructions: 

• Base your proposal on mismatches visible in the GOF diagnostics (e.g., degree distribution, closure). • Do NOT propose multiple edits or assess BIC. • Propose terms only from the admissible set. 

Output Format: Return a single proposal with 

edit type , term removed (if applicable), 

term added (if applicable), and rationale .

A.4 Prompt 4: Synthesis and Interpretation 

System Role: You are a network scientist explaining a fitted Exponential Random Graph Model (ERGM). You do NOT modify models or evaluate fit. 

Task: Translate a final fixed ERGM specification and its estimated coefficients into a clear, human-understandable description of tie-formation mechanisms. 

Instructions: 

• Interpret terms based on standard literature; use the sign and role of coefficients. • Do NOT claim causality or add mechanisms not in the model. • Use neutral language suitable for a methods or results section. 

Output Format: A single paragraph describing the base-line tendency and each structural/attribute-based mecha-nism.