Title: Political attitudes differ but share a common low-dimensional structure across social media and survey data

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.02102v1

Published Time: Tue, 03 Mar 2026 04:06:49 GMT

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
# Political attitudes differ but share a common low-dimensional structure across social media and survey data 

Antoine Vendeville a,b , Hiroki Yamashita b,c , and Pedro Ramaciotti b,a aSciences Po médialab, Paris, France 

> b

Complex Systems Institute of Paris Ile-de-France CNRS, Paris, France 

> c

École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales, Paris, France 

Abstract 

Does polarization online reflect the state of polarization in society? We study ideological positions and attitudes on several issues in France, a country with documented issue nonalignment. We compare distributions on X/Twitter with a nationally representative sample, focusing on two key properties: ideological polarization and issue alignment. Despite significant issue-wise divergences, positions of both the X population and the nationally representative sample present a similar bi-dimensional structure along two dominant bundles of aligned issues: a Left-Right divide, and a Global-Local divide. We then study how our results vary when accounting for key structural parameters of the online public sphere: activity, popularity, and visibility. We find that the dimensionality of attitude distributions shrinks as ideological polarization increases when selecting more active users. The divergence between political attitudes on social media and in survey data is greatly mediated by the combination of activity and popularity of social media users: users benefiting from the most exposure are also the most representative of the general public. Together, our results shed light on the structural similarities and differences between political attitudes from social media users and the general public. 

## 1 Introduction 

The study of political polarization has sparked widespread interest across academic disciplines in the last decades. Different forms of political polarization have been iden-tified in the literature 1, including ideological and issue polarization, as well as issue alignment. The former refers to the distancing of individuals along ideological scales or issue dimensions 2. Some scholars argue that Left- and Right-wing citizens have grown further apart 3,4, while others point to the inconclusiveness of evidence suggest-ing increasing political polarization 5,6. Issue alignment refers to the existence of correlation patterns between attitudes toward different political issues. How do these correlations delineate ideological and partisan groups is of particular interest 7. American scholars have hypothe-sized that the increased sorting of partisans along a single Liberal-Conservative axis is a key factor in the growing resentment between Democrat and Republican voters 8,9,thus relating issue alignment with affective polarization 10 .As attitude distribution collapses onto a single axis, the U.S. political landscape is typically (though not system-atically 3,11 ) thought of as a single-dimensional space. By contrast, scholarship agrees on the multidimen-sional nature of political competition and behavior in most European countries 12 –15 , linked to the multi-party nature of European politics 16 ,17 . Bottom-up cleavage the-ory explains the relation between parties and dimensions by positing that party competition reflects historically determined structures of socio-economic conflict 18 ,19 . To accommodate the diverse interests generated by combi-nations of social cleavages, a greater number of parties emerges. From a top-down strategic perspective, multi-party systems enable parties to introduce or activate di-mensions of competition 20 , thereby disrupting the policy linkages established by mainstream parties and offering alternative issue packages to voters 21 .The European political landscape has been classically conceptualized along two dimensions, the cultural and the economic Left-Right dimensions. But in the wake of the twenty-first century, social and economic global-ization have changed the meaning of classic cultural and economic dimensions, reflecting new political conflicts between winners and losers of globalization 22 . Global-ization is particularly epitomized in Europe by the issue of EU integration, being understood simultaneously as a social democratic project and as a challenge to national sovereignty 23 . Two recent developments have potentially intensified the centrality of this Global-Local divide. First, challenger parties exploited this new political conflict 24 ,while mainstream parties took accommodation strategies after the success of far-Right parties 25 . Second, under-lying social transformations, notably the decline of tra-ditional class and religious cleavages 26 ,27 have opened 1

> arXiv:2603.02102v1 [cs.SI] 2 Mar 2026

Vendeville et al., 2026 

grounds for the emergence of new lines of division 28 .Most results about the structure of the political com-petition at party level do not directly translate to the public. Research shows that issue or ideology positions of electorates are less structured than those of political elites 29 ,30 . In addition, part of the debate among the public is increasingly perceived through the lens of social platforms. Studies have shed light on recurring patterns of ideological (or issue) polarization 31 –37 and affective polarization 38 –41 in social media, while issue alignment has only recently started to gather attention. Research has unveiled alignment patterns between positions on Covid, migration and climate change in online debates across Austria, Germany and Finland 31 ,33 ,42 –44 , uncov-ering indices for the existence of a Global-Local divide, unaligned with the traditional Left-Right spectrum 42 –44 .Social media are widely used as political forums, but often misrepresent the plurality of political opinions 45 .Their users are disproportionately young and urban 46 –51 .An additional self-selection process separates active from passive users, as more ideologically extreme people are more inclined to engage in online discussions 47 ,52 –54 , and are rewarded with higher social feedback than moderate voices 55 . These observations however do not speak of the effect of social media on the broader public debate 56 ,57 .Because of the importance of social media debates in shaping perceptions on the public sphere, and partic-ularly perceptions on polarization, we conduct a study to compare ideological polarization and issue alignment between a nationally representative panel and a social media panel. Our study focuses on France, a multi-party, multi-dimensional political system, and on X (previously Twitter), in 2023. This corresponds to a period by which the platform had considerable penetration in the country, marking the end of decade of deep entanglement between elite, journalistic, and public political communication. De-spite subsequent partial abandonment of X by the public and political figures, the period for the data in our study targets a landmark in the history of the entanglement between offline politics and any social platform. We consider an X panel consisting of almost a million French users and their positions on a variety of politi-cal dimensions 58 . These positions were computed using ideology scaling methods calibrated and identified with political survey data 59 , and validated through manual and automated stance annotations. We compare these po-sition distributions with those from the European Social Survey (ESS), which contains self-declared positions of a representative sample of the French population 60 . We include eight political dimensions of interest, comprising a variety of ideological and issue dimensions relevant to the French political debate. Finally, we analyze how key structural variables that determine public perception in social media—activity, popularity, visibility—affect polar-ization, dimensionality, and divergences between online and offline political positions. Our results show that French X users are less po-larized ideologically than the general public. The X panel is strongly skewed towards Right-wing and anti-establishment positions, while the ESS panel exhibits more moderate positions. Despite these significant dif-ferences, we find that political positions in both panels are structured around a Left-Right divide (pertaining to issues such as immigration or redistribution of wealth) and a Global-Local divide (pertaining to issues such as EU integration and anti-elitism). This structure is re-markably more salient in X, explaining at least 90% of the variance in opinions, versus only 50% for the ESS panel. Finally, we show that more active users are ideo-logically more polarized, exhibit more aligned positions, and are less representative of the general public. The vast majority of them, however, are not very popular. The most visible users on the platform exhibit opinions that are less polarized ideologically, skewed toward Left-wing and Globalist positions, and overall closer to those of the general public. 

## 2 Results 

To study the French X population, we leverage a pub-licly available dataset 58 , collected in February 2023 and pertaining to the X accounts of 883 French Members of Parliament (MPs) and 978,050 of their followers. The users are endowed with spatial positions in a multidimen-sional political space that reflect their stances on various ideology axes and political issues. These positions take the form of continuous values between 0 and 10, computed via ideology scaling, calibrated and identified with politi-cal survey data, and validated against political stances declared by the users in their profile’s self-description (see “Methods”). The dataset also contains indicators of activity (tweeting rate, number of followees) and popu-larity (number of followers) for each account. We focus specifically on the MPs’ followers, henceforth referred to as the “X panel”, a set of spatially rational individuals 61 

coherent with the structure of national politics 59 .To compare the X population with the general public, we rely on the 2023 wave of the European Social Survey (ESS) 60 . The ESS is a respondent survey that collects socio-economic data, political attitudes and beliefs from nationally representative panels across European coun-tries. Political attitudes are encoded along Likert-type scales of various lengths. After filtering out missing val-ues, the French panel contains 1,417 respondents in 2023, henceforth referred to as the “ESS panel”. In accordance with the design of the ESS 62 , we take into account indi-vidual weights, stratum and primary sampling units in all of the computations (see “Methods”). For the purpose of our study, we select eight politi-cal dimensions that are comparable across the ESS and the X dataset: Left-Right, Anti-elitism, EU integration, Immigration, Redistribution of wealth, Social liberalism, 2Vendeville et al., 2026 

Environment, and Direct democracy (support or oppo-sition to referendums). These dimensions are selected based on three criteria: their relevance to the French political debate, the possibility to find proxies of posi-tions in the two sources of data, and the validity of the estimated positions of X users along these dimensions. We indicate the political dimensions and their ordering in both sources of data in Table 1 . Details about the scales and precise survey questions corresponding to the chosen dimensions are given in Supplementary Section 1. 

2.1 Dimension-wise comparison of online and offline positions 

We start by comparing dimension-wise distributions of political positions in the X and ESS panels. To facili-tate comparison, we discretize the X distributions along the same range as ESS, by sorting them into the ade-quate number of equal-length bins. Results are shown in 

Figure 1 a. The distributions are either equally spread along the spectrum with a high concentration of moderate users (e.g., Left-Right in ESS), or skewed on one side (e.g., Immigration in X). X users are generally right-wing, anti-elitist, anti-EU and anti-immigration, with more moder-ate stances on other dimensions. The dichotomy between clearly skewed positions on certain dimensions and moder-ate ones on others is reversed for ESS respondents. They are, on average, rather centrist, with moderate views on immigration, EU integration, and slight Anti-elitism (the overabundance of middle-point answers may be partially due to documented respondent bias 63 ). Where X users exhibit moderate stances, ESS respondents demonstrate remarkable consensus, clearly favorable to environmental-friendly policies, social liberalism, direct democracy and redistribution. No distribution exhibits a clear bimodal shape in ei-ther datasets, challenging the idea of highly polarized political positions. We evaluate polarization along each dimension, using a non-parametric entropy-based mea-sure proposed by Bao and Gill 64 . Values range between 0, for a distribution with a single outcome of positive proba-bility, and 1, for a distribution with two outcomes of equal probability. Results are shown in Figure 1 b. Polarization values are only comparable across dimensions that share the same support, indicated by brackets. However, we can proceed to dimension-wise comparisons between the two panels. We find higher levels of polarization among ESS respondents on all dimensions except Left-Right and social liberalism. Social liberalism, in particular, appears much more polarized online than offline. Looking at the distribution of the two panels along this dimension re-veals a mostly consensual socially liberal view among the general public, opposed to much more spread positions among X users. To quantify the representativeness of the X panel, we compute the Wasserstein distance ( WD ) between the two panels on each dimension. The Wasserstein distance, also known as the earth-mover’s distance, measures the distance between two distributions by the number of unit displacements that are required to transform one distribution into the other (see “Methods”). To ensure comparability across dimensions, we rescale WD by its maximum possible value so that it ranges from 0 (identi-cal distributions) to 1 (the masses of the two distributions are concentrated at opposite sides of the value range). X and ESS panelists are furthest away on Social lib-eralism ( WD > 0.4), echoing our previous observation. They are remarkably close on EU integration and anti-elitism ( WD < 0.1), and somewhat close on Left-Right (WD < 0.15 ). X users are thus most representative of the general public along these three dimensions. The low levels of polarization we observe do not con-cord with similar analyses, which most often uncover strong bimodality in ideological positions 33 ,38 . This might be due to the fact that existing analyses are based on retweet interactions, which are more homophilic than follow links 65 . Moreover, retweet data might exhibit bi-ases due to the unequal levels of activity across users 66 

(Supplementary Figure 7). On the other hand, most users follow an ideologically diverse array of accounts 57 , and our collection of follow links is exhaustive (see “Methods”). 

2.2 Alignment between political dimensions 

Having unveiled important dimension-wise divergences between the online and offline populations, we now focus on the alignment between dimensions. 

Figure 2 shows the Pearson correlations between di-mensions in each panel. Fewer dimension pairs exhibit strong correlations in the ESS panel (average absolute value of off-diagonal significant correlations: 0.56 for X vs. 0.18 for ESS). All correlations outside the diagonal are significant at the level p < 0.001 level for the X panel. The positions of individuals in the X panel are thus much more constrained. A common structure emerges from the two panels. The dimensions can be sorted into two groups that present high in-group correlations (in absolute value). The first group pertains to the Left-Right divide, combining cul-tural and economical issues: Immigration, Environment, Social liberalism, Redistribution, and the corresponding Left-Right ideological axis. The second group combines di-mensions related to populism (Anti-elitism, Direct democ-racy) with the EU integration issue. This axis opposes elitist, pro-globalization panelists to anti-elite, protection-ist ones. We call this second group the “Global-Local” divide by analogy with previous research on political dimensional identification on X 67 .While a similar macroscopical structure of constraints between issue attitudes exists both among ESS respon-dents and X users, this structure appears to be more salient and lower-dimensional in the online space, due to the overall stronger correlations. The average in-group 3Vendeville et al., 2026 

# ab c

Figure 1: Distributions of positions inactive the X panel and the ESS panel. (a) Histograms of attitude and ideology position distributions. Dotted vertical lines indicate the mean. Distributions for the X panel are sorted into bins to facilitate comparison with the ESS panel. (b) Polarization values across dimensions. Brackets indicate groups of dimensions that share the same support, and within which polarization values can be compared. (c) Normalized Wasserstein distance between X and ESS distributions, sorted from lowest (top) to highest (bottom). 

4Vendeville et al., 2026  

> Table 1: Political dimensions of interest. Description and ordering of the political dimensions considered. The ordering describes the qualitative variation of positions from the lower to the upper bound of the axes.

Dimension Ordering Description (ESS) 

Left-Right Left ←→ Right Placement on Left-Right scale Anti-elitism Low ←→ High Trust in politicians EU integration Pro ←→ Anti European unification go further or gone too far Immigration Pro ←→ Anti Immigrants make country worse or better place to live Redistribution Pro ←→ Anti Government should reduce differences in income levels Direct democracy Anti ←→ Pro Political system allows people to have a say in what government does Environment Pro ←→ Anti Important to care for nature and environment Social liberalism Pro ←→ Anti Gays and lesbians free to live life as they wish 

absolute correlation is about 0.81 for the X panel (respec-tively out-group, 0.35), with a ratio between in-group and out-group of about 2.32, against 2.09 for the ESS panel (0.19 in-group, 0.09 out-group). Remarkable cross-group correlations for the ESS panel include Immigration and Global-Local attitudes, as well as EU integration and Left-Right ideology. 

2.3 Low-dimensional structure 

The analysis of correlations suggest that political attitude distributions are structured in a similar manner across the two panels: a Left-Right and Global-Local divide, with stronger alignment among X than ESS panelists. To unveil the underlying structure of attitude distribution, we seek a lower-dimensional representation of each panel. We perform on each panel a Principal Component Analysis 68 (PCA), finding a small number of orthogonal axes in the high-dimensional space of available dimen-sions, onto which the data can be projected. These axes are called the Principal Components and are sorted by descending order of explained variance. Additionally, we compute the Effective Dimensionality 69 (ED) of each panel, a measure of the number of dimensions necessary to describe the structure of multidimensional political spaces, closely related to PCA (see “Methods”). ED = 1 

means that all political dimensions are perfectly corre-lated and the positions of the panelists can be expressed on a single line without loss of information (e.g., liberal-conservative); ED = 2 means that political positions can be expressed on a bidimensional plane (e.g., social issues and economical issues), and so on. If the dimensions are all uncorrelated then ED = 8 , and the political positions cannot be expressed in a lower-dimensional space without important loss of information. 

Figure 3 shows the variance and the cumulated vari-ance explained by each Principal Component, alongside with the effective dimensionality of each panel. The X panel exhibits an almost bi-dimensional structure, with the first two PCA components (hereafter, PC1 and PC2) explaining more than 90% of the variance together and an effective dimensionality of 2.55. In contrast, ESS re-spondents require at least seven components to explain 90% of the variance, and two to explain 50%. These observations echo our previous findings: the distributions of attitudes of X users are well expressed in a two-dimensional space, meaning an ideology sorting along two dividing lines, that we expect to be the Left-Right and Global-Local divides hypothesized after inspection of the correlation matrices. Although from the previous inspection of the correlations matrices, the same two di-vides appear to be relevant for the ESS panel, much less variance is explained by the first two PCA components in these cases, owing to the overall more moderate positions of individuals in the ESS panel. For a more systematic characterisation of the low-dimensional space unveiled by the PCA, we inspect the composition of PC1 and PC2, rotated to enhance in-terpretability (see “Methods”). Figure 4 displays the loadings of the political dimensions in the bidimensional space spanned by PC1 and PC2: the arrows show how the political positions of the panelists are ordered in the (PC1, PC2) plane, and the arrow lengths indicate how well the dimensions are summarized by the PCs. For instance, the Left-Right and the Environment dimensions are almost perfectly aligned with PC1 for the X panel, meaning that the positions of X panelists along these two dimensions are well summarized by a single axis in a low-dimensional space. In this low-dimensional space, political dimensions are clearly grouped in two clusters, corresponding to the hy-pothesized Left-Right and Global-Local divides (blue-red and green-brown arrows, respectively). A few bridging dimensions appear in the X and ESS panels. Immigra-tion in particular overlaps the two PCs in ESS, showing the particular relevance of this dimension along the two main dividing lines. For the X panel, Redistribution and Direct democracy also bear this role. The lower effective dimensionality of the X panel is reflected by the greater length of the arrows, showing that each dimension loads heavily on PC1 or PC2. This differs for the ESS panel, for instance with Social liberalism. In fact, the third PC is composed almost exclusively of Social liberalism, against Direct democracy for the X panel (Supplementary Figure 1). These dimensions are thus less aligned with others, 5Vendeville et al., 2026 

# X panel ESS panel             

> Figure 2: Pearson correlations between dimensions. Significance levels *: p < . 05 , **: p < . 01 , ***: p < . 001 . Immig: immigration, SocLib: Social liberalism, Env: environmental policies, Redist: redistribution, DirDem: Direct democracy. Percent of significant correlations: 100% (X), 71% (ESS). Average value of significant off-diagonal correlations: 0.56 (X), 0.18 (ESS). Strongest off-diagonal correlation: 0.97 (X, Anti-elitism and EU integration), 0.41 (ESS, Anti-elitism and Direct democracy). Each matrix differs from the identity (Bartlett’s sphericity test: χ2>300 , p < 0.001 ). Non-significant correlations and diagonal cells are colored in white.

not falling as neatly onto the (Left-Right, Global-Local) structure. We inspect in Figure 5 the distribution of X and ESS panelists in the low-dimensional space. Bar heights in-dicate the density of individuals, while color gradients map average values on the Left-Right (left panel) and Anti-elitism (right panel) dimensions. ESS panelists are distributed in a Gaussian manner, while the high align-ment of positions sorts the X panelists into three clearly identifiable poles: an anti-elite Left pole, a Center-Right pole with low or moderate anti-elite stances, and a highly anti-elite Far-Right pole. This result is driven by the more structured online political space, and stands in con-trast to the lower polarization of X panelists on individual dimensions. 

2.4 Variations of political positions with activity and popularity 

We now investigate how ideological polarization, issue alignment and distance from the general public vary across the different levels of activity and popularity among X users. We sort X panelists into bins according to their tweeting rate (activity), or number of followers (popular-ity). The number of panelists in each bin fluctuates in magnitude between the orders of 10 3 and 10 6 (Supple-mentary Figure 7). Sorting users by activity or popularity yields two very different pictures, as shown in Figure 6 . Activity appears to correlate with higher ideological polarization and issue alignment, and popularity with higher representativeness of the positions of the general public. The more active users are, the more polarized they are: ideological and issue polarization increase with tweet-ing rate for all political dimensions considered (panel 

a), albeit to a small extent (maximum increase: 0.1 on a 1-length scale). Dimensionality exhibits an almost monotonous inverse relation with tweeting rate (panel 

b), dropping to 2.34 for the most active user group. By contrast, the least active users exhibit slightly higher di-mensionality than the average. This downward trend in dimensionality might be explained by the reinforcement of correlations between dimensions within the Left-Right divide (panel c), suggesting that this single divide can summarize better than before individual positions. The picture is more contrasted when users are sorted according to popularity. Both the least and the most followed users exhibit lower polarization than the average, with only Environment displaying a sustained increase of polarization with popularity (panel a). The most po-larized users are found in the [10 3, 10 4] followers bracket. The variations of effective dimensionality with popularity do not exhibit a particular trend, although we notice that the most popular users exhibit high dimensionality (panel b). This might be due to reinforcement of correla-tions within the Global-Local divide (panel c), alongside 6Vendeville et al., 2026 

# a b    

> Figure 3: Variance explained by the principal components. We show explained (a) and cumulated explained variance
> (b) of populations on the European Social Survey (ESS) and X (previously Twitter). ED stands for Effective Dimensionality.

a diminishing of correlations between the Left-Right and Global-Local divides: these two observations point to a decrease of the summarizing power of the Left-Right divide. Regarding representativeness of the general public, the picture is most clear when sorting users by popularity. Popularity appears highly correlated with representative-ness, as the most popular users are also the closest to ESS panelists (panel d). The only exceptions are Direct democracy, and to a lesser extent EU integration, which display the opposite behavior. These results may stem from the downward trend in the position of users along PC1 and PC2 as popularity increases (panel e): the more popular the user, the more Left-wing and Globalist they are, pushing them closer to the ESS panel. The least and the most active X users on the other hand, form the two groups that are the least representa-tive of ESS respondents along most dimensions (panel d). These users are mostly Right-wing Localists (high values along PC1 and PC2, panel e). Users with a tweeting rate between 0.01 and 10 tweets per day are the only ones to be closer to ESS respondents than the average. As an illustration, we show in panel f the distribution of positions on immigration for the ESS panel, the X panel, the most active and the most popular X users. The most active users are much more anti immigration, while the most popular are much more pro immigration, thus bringing them closer to the general public described by the distribution of ESS respondents. 

2.5 Visible opinions in the online sphere 

This disparity between the political positions of the most active and the most popular users begs the ques-tion: How does X’s political sphere appears to the av-erage user? We define the visibility of an X user as 

tweeting rate × f ollowers . This quantity is consistent with the number of times that the users’ tweets were viewed, a metric that we have access to for a subsample of users in January and February 2023 (Pearson correla-tion 0.92, Supplementary Section 4.4). We weight users by their visibility and measure again the polarization of this population. Doing so, we draw a clearer picture of which users benefit from the most exposure on X—putting aside algorithmic effects. Under our visibility metrics and its underlying assumption, users who are not followed or who do not tweet are essentially invisible, while content posted by very active or very popular users is much more likely to appear on the feeds. When X panelists are weighted by their visibility, most of the distributions of political positions are less skewed and more moderate ( Figure 7 , panel a). In consequence, opinion distributions appear less polarized, and closer to the distribution of ESS panelists (panels b,c ). There-fore, the landscape of perceivable opinions of X users is closer to the opinions of the general French population. Regarding issue alignment and dimensionality however, there is no significant change when weighting the users (Supplementary Figure 9). 

## 3 Discussion 

This work assesses similarities and differences between online political spheres and broader public opinion, fo-cusing on ideological polarization and issue alignment. We studied the distributions of political positions of two populations: a population of users in the French X sphere, 7Vendeville et al., 2026 

> Right Anti immigration Anti social liberalism Anti redistribution Anti environmental policies

Left-Right divide 

> DirDem+
> DirDem-
> AE+ EU-
> AE-EU+
> Immig+ SocLib+ Env+ Left Redist+
> Redist-Right Env-SocLib-Immig-

# X panel 

> DirDem-EU+
> Immig-SocLib-Right Redist-Env-
> Redist+ Left SocLib+ Immig+ Env+
> DirDem+ EU-

# ESS panel 

Global-Local divide 

> Left
> Pro immigration
> Pro social liberalism
> Pro redistribution
> Pro environmental policies
> High anti-elitism Anti EU Pro direct democracy
> Low anti-elitism
> Pro EU
> Anti direct democracy AE-
> AE+

Figure 4: Loadings of political dimensions along principal components. Each arrow shows the loading of a political dimension along PC1 (x-axis) and PC2 (y-axis). Arrow length is proportional to the absolute value of the loading. Red-blue arrows correspond to dimensions related to the Left-Right attitudes, and green-brown arrows correspond to dimensions related to Global-Local attitudes Plus (+) signs are short for “pro”, and minus (-) signs for “anti”. 

for which opinions were derived via ideology scaling meth-ods and calibrated using political surveys data 58 , and a nationally representative panel of French citizens with self-declared attitude and ideology positions, extracted from the European Social Survey 60 . While the question of the representativeness of the X population is challeng-ing because it naturally lacks referential populations, the panel we use represents users that are directly connected to referential political actors (Members of Parliament in France), and constitutes a population that is spatially coherent. We studied eight relevant political dimensions: Left-Right, Immigration, Environment, Social liberalism, Redistribution of wealth, Anti-elitism, EU integration, and Direct democracy. We found the general public to be more polarized than X users engaged in the political sphere along al-most all dimensions. X users are, however, consistently skewed toward Right-wing, populist positions, while the general public exhibits more centrist positions. Regard-ing issue alignment, X users exhibited very constrained positions, as shown by the strong and highly significant correlations between political dimensions, while correla-tion patterns for the general public were similar but less significant. These correlation patterns appear to delineate two groups of political dimensions, with high in-group and low out-group correlations. In consequence, both the online and offline political spheres were amenable to a lower-dimensional representation. By applying a standard dimensionality reduction pro-cedure to our data, we unveiled a bi-dimensional rep-resentation for each population. This representation is structured around a typical Left-Right divide, pertain-ing to social and economical issues such as immigration and redistribution of wealth, and a Global-Local divide, opposing protectionist, populist attitudes to globalist, elitist attitudes. As a consequence of the higher and more significant correlations, this representation retained more than 90% of the variation in the original X data, against just 50% for the general public. While the gen-eral public is distributed in Gaussian-like manner in this bi-dimensional space, X users are concentrated around three poles: a Left-wing localist pole, a center-right pole, and a Far-Right localist pole. Our results are robust to an alternative choice of dimensionality reduction method (Supplementary Figure 4). Finally, we analyzed how these results vary with the activity and popularity of X users, measured by the tweet-ing rate and number of followers. By selecting more active users, the resulting polarization of distributions increases and the dimensionality of their political opinion space shrinks, indicative of increased issue alignment. Select-ing more popular users on the other hand, results in an enhanced representativeness with regards to the general public, with more Left-wing, Globalist positions in the low-dimensional space. To uncover the opinion landscape to which X users are exposed, we reiterated our previous analyses while weighting our sample by their estimated visibility on the platform (tweeting rate multiplied by number of followers). The landscape that emerges ap-pears generally less polarized and closer to the positions of the general public, but we observed no significant changes in terms of dimensionality and issue alignment (Supplementary Figure 9). Our findings must be contextualized within the politi-cal situation in France. At the time of data collection in 2023, a tri-partite structure opposed the governing coali-tion around Emmanuel Macron (Center-Right), the Right party Rassemblement National (RN, National Gathering), and the Left coalition led by the Radical Left party La France Insoumise (LFI, Unbowed France). The divide between the governing coalition and the two oppositions (LFI and RN, both displaying anti-elitist positions accord-8Vendeville et al., 2026 

> N individuals

PC1 PC2 

L

R

> N individuals

PC1 PC2 

AE-

AE+ 

# X panel 

> N individuals

PC1 PC2 

L

R

> N individuals

PC1 PC2 

AE-

AE+ 

# ESS panel 

Figure 5: Distribution of panelists in the low-dimensional space. The (PC1,PC2) plane is divided into a grid. Vertical bars indicate the number of individuals in each cell. Bar colors map the average position of individuals on the Left-Right and Anti-elitism dimensions. (a,b) X panel, grid size 30 × 30 . (c,d) ESS panel, grid size 20 × 20 .

9Vendeville et al., 2026 

# da b c

> less polarized more polarized less representative more representative

# e f  

> ()
> ()

Figure 6: Variation of polarization, representativeness and dimensionality of X panelists with activity and popularity. Users are binned according to their activity (tweeting rate), or their popularity (number of followers). Dotted lines indicate values computed for the whole panel. (a) Polarization along the different dimensions: in-bin value minus overall value. (b) Effective dimensionality. Grey squares denote users in the same activity bin, white triangles users in the same popularity bin. (c) Average absolute correlation between dimensions within the Left-Right divide (blue circles), within the Global-Local divide (red diamonds), and across the Left-Right and Global-Local divide (green crosses). (d) Wasserstein distance between positions of X users and ESS respondents: in-bin value minus overall value. (e) Average position of users along PC1 (blue circles) and PC2 (red diamonds), with 95% confidence intervals. (f) Distribution of positions on immigration for the ESS panel, the X panel, the most active X users (tweeting rate > 100 ), and the most popular X users (followers > 10 6). 

ing to expert surveys on party positions) was defined by attitudes toward globalization 70 , while LFI and RN were strongly opposed to one another on cultural issues. As such, the positions of these three poles cannot be reduced to a single Left-Right axis. Our findings offer two interrelated, crucial insights pertaining to online political debates. First, they restate the importance of considering multidimensional attitude and ideology distributions in the study of online political debates. We show the insufficiency of a single-dimensional representation of political positions of online users, which runs the risk of disregarding as much as 40% of the variation in opinions ( Figure 3 ). A lot of research in online debates has focused on single-dimensional polit-ical frames (Liberal-Conservative or Left-Right scales), for two reasons: the difficulty of obtaining fine-grained political positions for large online populations, and the prevalence of U.S.-focused studies. More general national settings, including most European ones, require multidi-mensional scales to analyze party competition 12 ,13 ,15 ,71 

and public opinion 29 ,30 . As most online studies focus on ideological and affective polarization, our methodology comes as a tool for the study of issue alignment. In par-ticular, the method for the inference of multidimensional opinions from interaction data, described in a previous publication 58 , is easily applicable to vast corpora of online data. The second insight of our study pertains to the rep-resentativeness of actors engaging in the online public debate when compared to the general public. Many studies have unveiled significant socio-demographically biased selection in online population compared to the general public 46 –51 , with additional selection separating active and inactive users 47 ,52 –55 . The last part of our results demonstrates that, despite significant political skew among X users in our panel, in particular highly active accounts, the most visible accounts—defined as both active and popular accounts—shape the contour of a political landscape that appears remarkably close to the general public’s opinion. Further studies shall investigate this complex interplay between activity, popularity and visibility to better understand mechanisms of exposure in online social media. Our study does not come without limitations. The 10 Vendeville et al., 2026 

# a bc       

> Figure 7: Visibility of opinions on X. We compare political positions between the X panel (red), and the X panel with users weighted by their visibility (green). (a) Distributions of positions for Left-Right and Anti-elitism. (b) Polarization along dimensions. (c) Wasserstein distance with the ESS panel.

first concerns the comparability between the X dataset and the ESS. The political positions of X users are com-puted on the basis of interactions with members of par-liament on the platform. As such, these positions are derived from observations of the political behavior of the users. By contrast, political opinions of ESS respondents are self-declared . This limitation is attenuated by the fact that the positions of the X users were consistent with self-declared opinions, retrieved on the users’ online profiles when available 58 . The second limitation of our study pertains to our analysis of the visibility of the X users. Visibility is not only dependent on activity and popularity, it is also highly dependent on algorithmic effects. The study of these effects is an important field of study by itself, rife with in-depth analyses of X 72 –74 .We argue that our choice of not considering algorithmic effects is a feature rather than a shortcoming. We choose specifically to focus on behavioral indices, to better under-stand the correlations that exist between online behavior and political positions. Our visibility index is directly re-lated to the potential number of views if recommendation was chronological, which is a common baseline against which algorithmic recommenders are often compared. In-tegrating algorithmic effects would considerably extend the scope of the article, and thus would be better suited as a separate study. We hope that our results and observations will encour-age future studies. They call for more research dedicated to the study of dimensionality of opinions in social media, and for more evaluations of the representativeness of the general population in online spaces. Future research shall strive to develop similar analyses for other countries. As the pool of relevant political issues and ideological axes may vary, it is particularly important to extend these con-siderations beyond a single country. Whenever possible, such studies shall also strive to assess how these results may vary over time. Finally, more platforms should be considered, especially in the light of the recent perspective on “echo platforms” 45 .

## 4 Methods 

4.1 X dataset 

The procedure employed to build the X dataset is detailed in the corresponding article 58 . We first collected meta-data of the X profiles of all French MPs present on the platform in February 2023, and of their followers. After filtering out accounts without sufficient connections, we built a bipartite network linking MPs and their followers. There are 883 MPs and 978K followers. Using the ideology scaling method originally proposed by Barberá 75 , MPs and their followers were embedded in a multidimensional latent ideological space. Distances in this space reflect ideological proximity between the users: it has been shown in several independent studies that the positions along the first dimension of this space are often strongly correlated with Left-Right ideology 75 ,76 .To go beyond the Left-Right axis, and derive individual positions along several political dimensions, we leveraged data from the 2019 and 2023 waves of the Chapel Hill Expert Survey (CHES) 77 ,78 . The CHES contains political positions of major parties in European countries, includ-ing France, in the form of floating numbers between 0 and 10, along several key ideological axes and political issues, e.g., Left-Right, Anti-elitism, Immigration, EU integration. Data from the CHES can thus be seen as an embedding of the political parties in a multidimensional hypercube 

[0 , 10] d. We established a mapping between this space 11 Vendeville et al., 2026 

and our latent space obtained by ideology scaling: we first computed proxies of party positions in our latent space by party-wise averaging of MPs’ positions, and then fitted a penalized linear regression between these and the party positions in the CHES space. We applied the resulting map to the latent positions of all the MPs and follow-ers, finally obtaining their individual positions along the dimensions of the CHES. In other words, each MP and follower is attributed a continuous position between 0 and 10 on each political dimension measured by the CHES: Left-Right axis, anti-elitism, immigration, EU integration, and so on. For the ease of analysis, in this article we replace values outside of [0 , 10] by 0 or 10 ; this concerns less than 5% of the users for each dimension. Detailed statistics are available in the corresponding article 58 .For 16 of the most relevant political dimensions, in-cluding those that we rely on for the present study, the po-sitions were consistent with self-declared opinions present in the users’ bios, demonstrating the validity of the results. Individual indicators of activity and popularity, namely the tweeting rate (mean number of tweets per day) and the number of followers of each user, were extracted from the accounts’ metadata given by the API. We lack meta-data for 156 users, which represents about 0.015% of the full dataset and should therefore not impact the results in any significant way. We focus the analysis on the followers, as we acknowl-edge that MPs represent a very specific subgroup of the population, for which a comparison with the general French opinion could be relevant but forms a different research question. 

4.2 European Social Survey 

The ESS is regularly conducted across European coun-tries. In each country, respondents from a nationally representative panel are asked about their socio-economic situation, religious beliefs, political opinions, and more. We leverage results from edition 4.1 of the 2023 wave 60 ,in order to compare the opinions of the broad French population with those of our X population. Political opin-ions are self-declared, given in the form of integers along Likert-type scales of varying ranges. There are 1,771 respondents in the French panel of ESS in 2023. We discard respondents with at least one missing value in the columns corresponding to the politi-cal dimensions that interest us. Missing values include answers “Not applicable”, “Refusal”, “No answer”, “Don’t know”. We end up with 1,417 respondents in the ESS panel. Finally, note that the ESS contains a question related to online political activity. We show in Supplementary Section 5 that we obtain qualitatively similar results when we only consider respondents who declared being politically active online. 

4.3 Taking into account survey design for ESS data 

Because of the cost-effective way that the ESS is con-ducted, the data as is presents biases. For instance, some individuals and socio-demographic categories are more likely to be surveyed, or to respond, than others. To ensure that our analysis of the ESS panel is robust and representative of the French population, we must take into account the survey design, which consists of three correction variables: weight, clustering, and stratification. We refer the interested reader to the ESS’s guide on the matter for more details 62 .R’s survey package provides a wide range of functions and algorithms that take into account the survey design. We use it to compute the correlation matrices of the ESS panel, to perform PCA for this panel, and to evaluate single-dimensional distributions. For the latter, we create tables with a corrected count of answers at each point of the Likert scale for each dimension. From these tables we draw the histograms, we compute ideological polarization, and we compute Wasserstein distance with the X panel. 

4.4 Binning X panelists 

Along each dimension, ESS panelists have integer-valued opinions, while the opinions of X panelists are continu-ous in [0 , 10] . To allow comparison, we discretize the X opinion distributions along the same range as ESS, by sorting them into the adequate number of equal-length bins: 11 bins for Left-Right, Immigration, Anti-elitism, EU integration, 5 bins for Social liberalism, Redistribu-tion, Direct democracy, and 6 bins for Environment. For instance, X users with positions on the Left-Right dimen-sion between 0 and 10 /11 ≃ 0.91 are sorted in the first bin, users between 0.91 and 2 × 10 /11 ≃ 1.82 in the sec-ond bin, and so on. We use these binned distributions for drawing histograms, computing ideological polarization, and computing Wasserstein distance with the ESS panel. 

4.5 Measuring ideological polarization 

There is ongoing scholarly debate about how to measure unidimensional ideological polarization 79 . We rely on a recently proposed metric 64 , based on the notion of cumu-lative entropy. This metric is limited to ordinal data, but has the advantage of simultaneously taking into account spread and bimodality. Let us assume a distribution over the value range 1, ..., k . For instance, the distribution of answers for a survey question with k possible answers. The polarization of the distribution is defined as 

Ec = H(S1, 1 − S1) + ... + H(Sk−1, 1 − Sk−1)

k − 1 , (1) where Sj = ∑ji=1 pi, and H denotes the binary entropy: 

H(p, 1 − p) = 2 −p log 2 p−(1 −p) log 2(1 −p) − 1. (2) 12 Vendeville et al., 2026 

We assume that 0 × log 2 0 = 0 . The binary entropy 

H(p, 1 − p) ∈ [0 , 1] measures the uncertainty of a random variable with a binary outcome. The closer p is to 0.5,the more equally likely is each possible outcome. Now, 

Sj is the cumulated mass of the distribution up to point 

j. Thus, H(Sj , 1 − Sj ) measures the disparity of mass between two halves of the distribution of interest: val-ues smaller or equal to j, and values strictly higher. Ec

averages this disparity over all possible values j. A distri-bution where all the mass is concentrated at one point will have Ec = 0 , because for each j either Sj or 1 − Sj

is zero, thus H is always zero. By contrast, where the mass is equally split between the two ends of the value range, each Sj is exactly 0.5, maximizing each H term to 1, resulting in Ec = 1 .

4.6 Wasserstein distance 

The Wasserstein distance ( WD ), also known as the earth-mover’s distance, quantifies the distance between two distributions by the number of unit displacements that are required to transform one distribution into another. It allows us to simply evaluate how far apart are the opinions of the X and the ESS panel. It is defined as 

WD (p, q ) = inf  

> γ∈Γ( p,q )

E(x,y )∼γ |x − y|, (3) where Γ( p, q ) represents the set of all joint distributions with marginals p and q. We rescale WD by its maximum, reached when the masses of p and q are concentrated at the two opposite extremes of the value range. Thus, we obtain values between 0 and 1 for all dimensions, allowing for cross-dimension comparison. We compute WD using the ready-made implementation in Python’s scipy library. 

4.7 Principal Component Analysis (PCA) 

For dimensionality reduction, we used Principal Com-ponent Analysis (PCA). PCA infers a low-dimensional representation of a dataset by leveraging the eigenspace of the correlation matrix. The eigenvectors of the corre-lation matrix represent pair-wise orthogonal directions of maximum variance in the data. They are the principal components, that we order by the variance of the data they capture, given by the corresponding eigenvalues. Thus, the first principal component is the eigenvector associated with the largest eigenvalue of the correlation matrix, and describes the direction of the original data with the most variance. The variance explained ( Figure 3 , panel a) is the ratio of each eigenvalue over the sum of all eigenvalues. Panel 

b shows a cumulated sum of these ratios, indicating how much variance is explained by the k first PCA components together. The loadings of the original variables along a PCA component quantify the contribution of each variable to that component. They indicate how strongly and in what direction each variable influences the principal component, helping to interpret what the component represents in terms of the original data. High absolute loading values suggest a strong association between the variable and the component, while low values indicate that the variable is less associated with the component. 

4.7.1 Pre-processing 

Before performing PCA we standardize the datasets, to ensure that variables with high variance do not dominate the analysis simply due to their scale. Standardization transforms all variables to have a mean of 0 and a stan-dard deviation of 1, placing them on a comparable scale. This step is critical because variables with larger original ranges disproportionately influence the principal compo-nents. Standardization is even more indispensable for the ESS panels, as the variables span different ranges. 

4.7.2 Rotation of principal components 

Once we have selected the first two principal components for inspection, we rotate them with the varimax method. The purpose of this step is to enhance interpretability of the low-dimensional space. In some cases, it happens that most—if not all—of the variables load on the first components. This makes interpretation difficult, as every dimension is correlated with each component. Varimax rotation consists in finding a different orthogonal basis for the components, which spreads the variance more equally between the components while expressing the same correlation structure. Varimax rotation proceeds by increasing high loadings and decreasing low loadings, effectively enhancing the interpretation of the association between variables and principal components. Note that the ordering between PC1 and PC2 post-rotation is not an indicator of the variance of the original data that each captures. To further enhance readability, we reverse the ordering of each principal component for the ESS panel: we replace coordinates (x,y) in the (PC1,PC2) plane by (-x,-y). This ensures that the ordering of the political dimensions along the rotated components matches that of the X panel. It is important to note that these steps do not alter the low-dimensional structure of the data. They make it simply more visually interpretable across the two pan-els. Pre-rotation, pre-reflection loadings are shown in Supplementary Section 2.4. 

4.7.3 Robustness 

We choose to use PCA among other dimensionality re-duction methods, in particular because it can take into account the survey design of the ESS, ensuring that our re-sults are representative of the French population. Similar results are obtained with Exploratory Factor Analysis 68 ,a dimensionality reduction procedure which is widely used 13 Vendeville et al., 2026 

for the analysis of political surveys 13 ,80 (Supplementary Figure 4). 

4.8 Effective dimensionality 

Let M = 8 be the number of variables in the data, i.e., the number of political dimensions of interest. The effective dimensionality of a panel is defined as 

ED =

> M

∏

> m=1

(λm/M )−λm/M , (4) where the λs are the eigenvalues of the matrix of cor-relation between the variables. If all the variables are perfectly correlated, there exists a single non-zero eigen-value equal to M and ED = 1 . If all the variables are perfectly uncorrelated, then there are M eigenvalues equal to 1 and ED = M . Finally, consider the case where the data contains four variables x1, x 2, x 3, x 4. Let us assume that the first two are perfectly correlated and are orthog-onal to the latter two, that are also perfectly correlated. The correlation matrix is given by 



1 1 0 01 1 0 00 0 1 10 0 1 1

 . (5) The eigenvalues are 2, 2, 0, 0, and we obtain ED = 2 .The data can thus be summarized in a two-dimensional space without loss of information. For instance, each data point is fully described by its (x1, x 3) coordinates, without needing to know the values of x2, x 4.We refer the interested reader to ref. 81 for a technical introduction to effective dimensionality, and to ref. 69 for an application to the dimensionality of party positions in E.U. countries. 

## Data availability 

The datasets used in this paper are available online at https://osf.io/at5q2/ (X dataset), and 

https://ess.sikt.no/en/ (European Social Survey). 

## Code availability 

The code used to analyze data is available on-line at https://github.com/AntoineVendeville/political-attitudes-socmed-survey .

## References 

1. Jost, J. T., Baldassarri, D. S. & Druckman, J. N. Cognitive–Motivational Mechanisms of Political Po-larization in Social-Communicative Contexts. Nat. Rev. Psychol. 1, 560–576 (Aug. 2022). 2. DiMaggio, P., Evans, J. & Bryson, B. Have Ameri-can’s social attitudes become more polarized? Am. J. Sociol. 102, 690–755 (1996). 3. Ojer, J., Cárcamo, D., Pastor-Satorras, R. &Starnini, M. Charting Multidimensional Ideologi-cal Polarization across Demographic Groups in the USA. Nat. Hum. Behav. (July 2025). 4. Abramowitz, A. I. & Saunders, K. L. Is Polarization a Myth? J. Polit. 70, 542–555 (Apr. 2008). 5. Fiorina, M. P. & Abrams, S. J. Political Polarization in the American Public. Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 11, 

563–588 (June 2008). 6. Traber, D., Stoetzer, L. F. & Burri, T. Group-Based Public Opinion Polarisation in Multi-Party Systems. 

West Eur. Polit. 46, 652–677 (June 2023). 7. Baldassarri, D. & Gelman, A. Partisans without Con-straint: Political Polarization and Trends in Amer-ican Public Opinion. Am. J. Sociol. 114, 404–446 (2008). 8. Finkel, E. J. et al. Political Sectarianism in America. 

Science 370, 533–536 (Oct. 2020). 9. Mason, L. “I Disrespectfully Agree”: The Differen-tial Effects of Partisan Sorting on Social and Issue Polarization. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 59, 128–145 (2015). 10. Iyengar, S., Lelkes, Y., Levendusky, M., Malhotra, N. & Westwood, S. J. The Origins and Consequences of Affective Polarization in the United States. Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 22, 129–146 (May 2019). 11. Uscinski, J. E. et al. American politics in two di-mensions: Partisan and ideological identities versus anti-establishment orientations. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 

65, 877–895 (2021). 12. McCoy, J., Rahman, T. & Somer, M. Polarization and the Global Crisis of Democracy: Common Pat-terns, Dynamics, and Pernicious Consequences for Democratic Polities. Am. Behav. Sci. 62, 16–42 (Jan. 2018). 13. Bakker, R., Jolly, S. & Polk, J. Complexity in the Eu-ropean party space: Exploring dimensionality with experts. Eur. Union Polit. 13, 219–245 (2012). 14. Stoll, H. Elite-Level Conflict Salience and Dimension-ality in Western Europe: Concepts and Empirical Findings. West Eur. Polit. 33, 445–473 (2010). 15. Bornschier, S. The New Cultural Divide and the Two-Dimensional Political Space in Western Europe. 

West Eur. Polit. 33, 419–444 (2010). 16. Lijphart, A. Democracies: patterns of majoritarian and consensus government in twenty-one countries 

eng (Yale University Press, New Haven London, 1984). 17. Taagepera, R. The Number of Parties As a Function of Heterogeneity and Electoral System. Comp. Polit. Stud. 32, 531–548 (Aug. 1999). 14 Vendeville et al., 2026 

18. Lipset, S. M. & Rokkan, S. Cleavage Structures, Party Systems, and Voter Alignments (Free Press, New York, 1967). 19. Bartolini, S. & Mair, P. Identity, competition and electoral availability: the stabilisation of European electorates, 1885 - 1985 (ECPR Press, Colchester, 2007). 20. De Vries, C. E. & Hobolt, S. B. When dimensions collide: The electoral success of issue entrepreneurs. en. Eur. Union Polit. 13, 246–268 (June 2012). 21. Rovny, J. & Edwards, E. E. Struggle over Dimension-ality: Party Competition in Western and Eastern Europe. E. Eur. Polit. Soc. 26, 56–74 (Feb. 2012). 22. Kriesi, H. et al. Globalization and the transforma-tion of the national political space: Six European countries compared. en. Eur. J. Polit. Res. 45, 921– 956 (Oct. 2006). 23. Marks, G. & Wilson, C. J. The Past in the Present: A Cleavage Theory of Party Response to European Integration. Br. J. Polit. Sci. 30, 433–459 (July 2000). 24. De Vries, C. E. & Hobolt, S. B. Political En-trepreneurs: the rise of challenger parties in Europe 

(Princeton University Press, S.L., 2023). 25. Abou-Chadi, T. & Krause, W. The Causal Effect of Radical Right Success on Mainstream Parties’ Pol-icy Positions: A Regression Discontinuity Approach. eng. Br. J. Polit. Sci. 50. Publisher: Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 829–847 (2020). 26. Kriesi, H. et al. West European Politics in the Age of Globalization (Cambridge University Press, Sept. 2008). 27. Marcinkiewicz, K. & Dassonneville, R. Do religious voters support populist radical right parties? Op-posite effects in Western and East-Central Europe. 

Party Polit. 28. Publisher: SAGE Publications Ltd, 444–456 (May 2022). 28. Bornschier, S., Haffert, L., Häusermann, S., Steen-bergen, M. & Zollinger, D. Cleavage Formation in the 21st Century: How Social Identities Shape Vot-ing Behavior in Contexts of Electoral Realignment 

1st ed. (Cambridge University Press, Dec. 2024). 29. Wheatley, J. & Mendez, F. Reconceptualizing Di-mensions of Political Competition In Europe: A Demand-side Approach. en. Br. J. Polit. Sci. 51, 

40–59 (Jan. 2021). 30. Kurella, A. - S. & Rapp, M. Unfolding GAL-TAN: the multi-dimensional nature of public opinion in Western Europe. en. West Eur. Polit., 1–26 (Feb. 2025). 31. Salloum, A., Chen, T. H. Y. & Kivelä, M. Anatomy of elite and mass polarization in social networks. 

Network Science 13, e18 (2025). 32. Quelle, D. & Bovet, A. Bluesky: Network topology, polarization, and algorithmic curation. PLOS ONE 

20, 1–10 (Feb. 2025). 33. Loru, E. et al. Ideology and Polarization Set the Agenda on Social Media. Sci. Rep. 15, 35816 (Oct. 2025). 34. Flamino, J. et al. Political polarization of news me-dia and influencers on Twitter in the 2016 and 2020 US presidential elections. Nat. Hum. Behav. 7, 904– 916 (2023). 35. Falkenberg, M. et al. Growing Polarization around Climate Change on Social Media. Nat. Clim. Chang. 

12, 1114–1121 (Dec. 2022). 36. Waller, I. & Anderson, A. Quantifying Social Organi-zation and Political Polarization in Online Platforms. 

Nature 600, 264–268 (Dec. 2021). 37. Cinelli, M. et al. The COVID-19 Social Media Info-demic. Sci. Rep. 10, 16598 (Oct. 2020). 38. Falkenberg, M., Zollo, F., Quattrociocchi, W., Pfef-fer, J. & Baronchelli, A. Patterns of Partisan Toxicity and Engagement Reveal the Common Structure of Online Political Communication across Countries. 

Nat. Commun. 15, 9560 (Nov. 2024). 39. Lerman, K., Feldman, D., He, Z., et al. Affective polarization and dynamics of information spread in online networks. npj Complexity 1, 8 (2024). 40. Efstratiou, A. et al. Non-Polar Opposites: Analyzing the Relationship between Echo Chambers and Hos-tile Intergroup Interactions on Reddit in Proceedings of the Seventeenth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media (ICWSM2023) 17 (June 2023), 197–208. 41. Williams, H. T., McMurray, J. R., Kurz, T. & Hugo Lambert, F. Network analysis reveals open forums and echo chambers in social media discussions of climate change. Glob. Environ. Change 32, 126–138 (2015). 42. Fraxanet, E., Pellert, M., Schweighofer, S., Gómez, V. & Garcia, D. Unpacking polarization: Antago-nism and alignment in signed networks of online interaction. PNAS Nexus 3, pgae276 (July 2024). 43. Pournaki, A., Gaisbauer, F. & Olbrich, E. How Influ-encers and Multipliers Drive Polarization and Issue Alignment on Twitter/X in. 19 (2025), 1599–1615. 44. Chen, T. H. Y., Salloum, A., Gronow, A., Ylä-Anttila, T. & Kivelä, M. Polarization of Climate Politics Results from Partisan Sorting: Evidence from Finnish Twittersphere. Glob. Environ. Change 

71, 102348 (Nov. 2021). 15 Vendeville et al., 2026 

45. Martino, E. D., Galeazzi, A., Starnini, M., Quat-trociocchi, W. & Cinelli, M. Ideological Frag-mentation of the Social Media Ecosystem: From echo chambers to echo platforms Preprint at: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.16826. 2025. 46. Mellon, J. & Prosser, C. Twitter and Facebook are not representative of the general population: Po-litical attitudes and demographics of British social media users. Res. Polit. 4, 2053168017720008 (2017). 47. Barberá, P. & Rivero, G. Understanding the Polit-ical Representativeness of Twitter Users. Soc. Sci. Comput. Rev. 33, 712–729 (Dec. 2015). 48. Filho, R. M., Almeida, J. M. & Pappa, G. L. Twitter Population Sample Bias and Its Impact on Predictive Outcomes: A Case Study on Elections in Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining 2015 (ACM, Paris France, Aug. 2015), 1254–1261. 49. Malik, M., Lamba, H., Nakos, C. & Pfeffer, J. Pop-ulation Bias in Geotagged Tweets in Proceedings of the Fifth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media (ICWSM2021) 9 (Aug. 2021), 18– 27. 50. Mislove, A., Lehmann, S., Ahn, Y. - Y., Onnela, J. - P. & Rosenquist, J. Understanding the Demographics of Twitter Users. Proceedings of the Fifth Interna-tional AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media (ICWSM2021) 5, 554–557 (Aug. 2021). 51. Vaccari, C. et al. Social media and political commu-nication. A survey of Twitter users during the 2013 Italian general election. it. Ital. Polit. Sci. Rev. 3, 

381–410 (2013). 52. Chen, Y., Kmetty, Z., Iñiguez, G. & Omodei, E. The public that engages invisibly: what visible engage-ment fails to capture in online political communi-cation. Commun. Methods Measures 19, 294–312 (2025). 53. Bessi, A. et al. Homophily and polarization in the age of misinformation. en. Eur. Phys. J. Spec. Top. 

225, 2047–2059 (Oct. 2016). 54. Vaccari, C. et al. Of Echo Chambers and Contrarian Clubs: Exposure to Political Disagreement Among German and Italian Users of Twitter. Soc. Media. Soc. 2 (2016). 55. Garimella, K., De Francisci Morales, G., Gionis, A. & Mathioudakis, M. Political Discourse on Social Media: Echo Chambers, Gatekeepers, and the Price of Bipartisanship in Proceedings of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference (International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee, Republic and Canton of Geneva, CHE, Apr. 2018), 913–922. 56. Guess, A. M. et al. Reshares on social media amplify political news but do not detectably affect beliefs or opinions. Science 381, 404–408 (July 2023). 57. Barberá, P. How Social Media Reduces Mass Polit-ical Polarization. Evidence from Germany, Spain, and the U.S. Paper presented at the 2015 American Political Science Association conference. 2015. 58. Vendeville, A. et al. Mapping the political landscape from data traces: multidimensional opinions of users, politicians and media outlets on X. Data in Brief, 

112615 (2026). 59. Ramaciotti, P. et al. Inferring Attitudinal Spaces in Social Networks. Soc. Netw. Anal. Min. 13, 14 (Dec. 2022). 60. European Social Survey European Research Infras-tructure (ESS ERIC). ESS Round 11 - 2023. Social Inequalities in Health, Gender in Contemporary Eu-rope 2025. 61. Luskin, R. C. Explaining political sophistication. 

Polit. Behav. 12, 331–361 (1990). 62. Kaminska, O. Guide to Using Weights and Sample Design Indicators with ESS Data v1.1. 2020. 63. Baka, A., Figgou, L. & Triga, V. ’Neither agree, nor disagree’: a critical analysis of the middle answer category in Voting Advice Applications. Interna-tional Journal of Electronic Governance 5, 244–263 (2012). 64. Bao, L. & Gill, J. A nonparametric entropy-based measure of mass political polarization. Polit. Sci. Res. Methods 12, 821–840 (2024). 65. Vendeville, A. Voter model can accurately predict individual opinions in online populations. Phys. Rev. E 111, 064310 (6 2025). 66. Bona, G. D. et al. Sampled Datasets Risk Substantial Bias in the Identification of Polit-ical Polarization on Social Media Preprint at: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.19867. 2024. 67. Morales, P. R., Cointet, J. - P. & Zolotoochin, G. M. 

Unfolding the dimensionality structure of social net-works in ideological embeddings in Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Ad-vances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (As-sociation for Computing Machinery, Virtual Event, Netherlands, 2022), 333–338. 68. Jolliffe, I. T. Principal Component Analysis 2nd ed. (Springer-Verlag, New York, NY, 2002). 69. Koedam, J., Binding, G. & Steenbergen, M. R. Mul-tidimensional party polarization in Europe: cross-cutting divides and effective dimensionality. Br. J. Polit. Sci. 55, e24 (2025). 70. Gougou, F. La consolidation d’un nouvel ordre élec-toral ? Les élections françaises de 2022 dans la per-spective des réalignements. Fr. Revue française de science politique Vol. 72, 915–943 (Jan. 2024). 16 Vendeville et al., 2026 

71. Dolezal, M., Eder, N., Kritzinger, S. & Zeglovits, E. The structure of issue attitudes Revisited: a dimen-sional analysis of Austrian voters and party elites. 

J. Elect. Public Opin. Parties 23, 423–443 (2013). 72. Piccardi, T. et al. Reranking Partisan Animosity in Algorithmic Social Media Feeds Alters Affective Polarization. Science 390, eadu5584 (Nov. 2025). 73. Bouchaud, P., Chavalarias, D. & Panahi, M. Crowd-sourced Audit of Twitter’s Recommender Systems. 

Sci. Rep. 13, 16815 (Oct. 2023). 74. Huszár, F. et al. Algorithmic Amplification of Poli-tics on Twitter. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119, e2025334119 (Jan. 2022). 75. Barberá, P. Birds of the Same Feather Tweet To-gether: Bayesian Ideal Point Estimation Using Twit-ter Data. Polit. Anal. 23, 76–91 (2015). 76. Bond, R. & Messing, S. Quantifying Social Media’s Political Space: Estimating Ideology from Publicly Revealed Preferences on Facebook. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 109, 62–78 (2015). 77. Jolly, S. et al. Chapel Hill Expert Survey trend file, 1999-2019. Electoral Stud. 75, 102420 (2022). 78. Hooghe, L. et al. The Russian Threat and the Con-solidation of the West: How Populism and EU-skepticism shape party support for Ukraine. Eur. Union Polit. 25 (2024). 79. Martino, E. D., Cinelli, M., Cerqueti, R. & Quat-trociocchi, W. Quantifying Polarization: A Compar-ative Study of Measures and Methods Preprint at: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.07473. 2025. 80. Stimson, J. A., Thiébaut, C. & Tiberj, V. The Evo-lution of Policy Attitudes in France. Eur. Union Polit. 13, 293–316 (June 2012). 81. Giudice, M. D. Effective Dimensionality: A Tutorial. 

Multivariate Behav. Res. 56, 527–542 (2021). 

## Acknowledgment 

We thank Alexander T. Kindel for his precious advice on the methodology, and Max Falkenberg for useful discus-sions. This work has been partially funded by the “Eu-ropean Polarisation Observatory” (EPO) of CIVICA Re-search, co-funded by EU’s Horizon 2020 programme under grant agreement No 101017201, by European Union Hori-zon program project “Social Media for Democracy” under grant agreement No 101094752 ( www.some4dem.eu ), by the Very Large Research Infrastructure (TGIR) Huma-Num of CNRS, Aix-Marseille Université and Campus Condorcet, and by Project Liberty Institute project “AI-Political Machines” (AIPM). 

## Author contribution 

A.V. processed the data and performed the analysis. A.V., H.Y. and P.R. contributed to the design of the study, the interpretation of the results and the writing of the manuscript. 

## Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 17 Political attitudes differ but share a common low-dimensional structure across social media and survey data 

Antoine Vendeville a,b , Hiroki Yamashita b,c , and Pedro Ramaciotti b,a aSciences Po médialab, Paris, France 

> b

Complex Systems Institute of Paris Ile-de-France CNRS, Paris, France 

> c

École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales, Paris, France 

# Contents 

1 Variables of interest 1

2 Low-dimensional structure 1

2.1 Contributions of dimensions to principal components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

2.2 Distribution of users along principal components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

2.3 Exploratory factor analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

2.4 Unrotated principal components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

3 Distribution of activity, popularity and visibility 4

4 Visibility analysis 5

4.1 Dimension-wise distributions of positions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

4.2 Low-dimensional structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

4.3 Variations along visibility values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

4.4 Robustness of visibility metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

5 Politically active online ESS respondents 8

# 1 Variables of interest 

We detail the variables corresponding to the political dimensions of interest in Table 1 (X data) and Table 2 (ESS data). For the ESS data, we do not list the weight, stratum and primary sampling unit variables ( anweight, stratum, psu , respectively). For the X data, we indicate corresponding questions from the 2019 and 2023 waves of the CHES 1,2, that were used to calibrate the X data. The scales indicated in the tables are those of the original data. For the purpose of our analysis we reversed the scales of some of them, as indicated in the tables: EU integration (reversed for both X and ESS panels), Anti-elitism, Immigration, Direct democracy (reversed only for ESS panel). 

# 2 Low-dimensional structure 

We show additional results concerning the low-dimensional structure of the opinion spaces. 

## 2.1 Contributions of dimensions to principal components 

Figure 1 shows the contributions (normalized squared loadings) of each dimension to each principal component. Because rotation is dependent on the number of rotated components, rotating components beyond the first two that we analyze in the article would output inconsistent results with the rest of our analysis. Thus we show here loadings along the unrotated principal components—note that they are mostly the same as the rotated components for the X panel ( Figure 5 ). The composition of the third principal components consists almost exclusively of Direct democracy (X panel) or Social liberalism (ESS panel). This echoes observations regarding the loadings of these dimensions on the first two principal components in the main text. 1Supplementary information Vendeville et al., 2025 

Table 1: Variables of interest in the X dataset. Variables from the X dataset corresponding to the political dimensions of interest. Scales are continuous between 0 and 10. 

Dimension Variable Question (CHES) Scale 

Left-Right lrgen_19 Position of the party in 2019 in terms of its overall ideological stance. 0 = Extreme Left, ...., 10 = Extreme Right. 

Anti-elitism antielite_salience_23 How salient has ANTI-ESTABLISHMENT and ANTI-ELITE RHETORIC been to each party? 0 = Not important at all, ..., 10 = Extremely important 

EU integration eu_position_23 How would you describe the GEN-ERAL POSITION ON EUROPEAN INTEGRATION that the party lead-ership took over the past three months? 0 = Strongly opposed, ..., 10 =Strongly in favor (reversed) .

Immigration immigrate_policy_19 Position on immigration policy. 0 = Strongly favors a liberal policy on immigration, ..., 10 = Strongly favors a restrictive policy on immigration. 

Redistribution lrecon_23 Parties can be classified in terms of their stance on ECONOMIC ISSUES such as privatization, taxes, regu-lation, government spending, and the welfare state. Parties on the economic left want the government to play an active role in the econ-omy. Those on the economic right want a reduced role for government. Where did political parties stand on ECONOMIC issues in the last three months? 0 = Extreme Left, ..., 10 = Extreme Right. 

Direct democracy people_vs_elite_1 Position on people vs elected rep-resentatives. Some political parties take the position that “the people” should have the final say on the most important issues, for example, by voting directly in referendums. At the opposite pole are political parties that believe that elected representa-tives should make the most impor-tant political decisions. 0 = Elected office holders should make the most important decisions, ..., 10 = “The people”, not politi-cians, should make the most impor-tant decisions. 

Environment environment_19 Position towards environmental sus-tainability. 0: Strongly supports environmental protection even at the cost of eco-nomic growth, ..., 10: Strongly sup-ports economic growth even at the cost of environmental protection. 

Social Liberalism sociallifestyle_19 Position on social lifestyle (e.g. rights for homosexuals, gender equality). 0 = Strongly supports liberal policies, ..., 10 = Strongly opposes liberal poli-cies. 

2Supplementary information Vendeville et al., 2025 

Table 2: Variables of interest in the ESS dataset. Variables from the ESS dataset corresponding to the political dimensions of interest. Scales are discrete. “Refusal”, “Don ´t know”, “No answer”, “Not applicable” count as missing values. 

Dimension Variable Question Answer scale 

Left-Right lrscale In politics people sometimes talk of ’left’ and ’right’. Where would you place yourself on this scale, where 0 means the left and 10 means the right? 0: Left, ..., 10: Right, 77: Refusal, 88: Don’t know, 99: No answer. 

Anti-elitism trstplt Please tell me on a score of 0-10 how much you personally trust each of the institutions I read out. 0 means you do not trust an institution at all, and 10 means you have complete trust. Firstly... ...politicians? 0: No trust at all, ..., 10: Complete trust, 77: Refusal, 88: Don’t know, 99: No answer. 

(reversed) 

EU integration euftf Now thinking about the European Union, some say European unification should go further. Others say it has already gone too far. What number on the scale best describes your position? 0: Unification already gone too far, ..., 10: Unification go further, 77: Refusal, 88: Don’t know, 99: No answer. (reversed) 

Immigration imwbcnt Is France made a worse or a better place to live by people coming to live here from other countries? 0: Worse place to live, ..., 10: Better place to live, 77: Refusal, 88: Don’t know, 99: No answer. (reversed) 

Redistribution gincdif Please say to what extent you agree or dis-agree with each of the following statements. The government should take measures to reduce differences in income levels. 1: Agree strongly, 2: Agree, 3: Neither agree nor disagree, 4: Disagree, 5: Disagree strongly, 7: Refusal, 8: Don’t know, 9: No answer. 

Direct democracy psppsgva How much would you say the political sys-tem in France allows people like you to have a say in what the government does? 1: Not at all, 2: Very little, 3: Some, 4: A lot, 5: A great deal, 7: Refusal, 8: Don’t know, 9: No answer. (reversed) 

Environment impenva Now I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. She/he strongly believes that people should care for nature. Looking after the environment is important to her/him. 1: Very much like me, 2: Like me, 3: Some-what like me, 4: A little like me, 5: Not like me, 6: Not like me at all, 66: Not ap-plicable, 77: Refusal, 88: Don’t know, 99: No answer. 

Social Liberalism freehms Please say to what extent you agree or dis-agree with each of the following statements. Gay men and lesbians should be free to live their own life as they wish. 1: Agree strongly, 2: Agree, 3: Neither agree nor disagree, 4: Disagree, 5: Disagree strongly, 7: Refusal, 8: Don’t know, 9: No answer. 

3Supplementary information Vendeville et al., 2025 

ESS panel X

panel  

> Figure 1: Contribution of dimensions to the principal components. For each principal component we first square the loadings and then divide the results by the sum of those squares. These are computed before rotation and reflection of the principal components.

## 2.2 Distribution of users along principal components 

Figure 2 shows the log density of users in the two-dimensional (PC1,PC2) plane, divided into a 30 × 30 grid. Figure 3 

shows, for each political dimension, the average opinion of users in the (PC1,PC2) plane. 

## 2.3 Exploratory factor analysis 

To confirm the robustness of the results we obtained via PCA, we also perform an exploratory factor analysis (EFA). EFA differs from PCA as it explicitly posits a latent model to express the data in a low-dimensional space. The assumption is that each variable in the data can be expressed as a linear combination of factors, plus an error term. This means that the number of factors must be chosen a priori, as the results on early factors change when adding new factors—contrary to PCA. Additionally, EFA focuses on reproducing the covariance between the variables, while PCA focuses on capturing the variance of individual variables. We refer the interested reader to ref. 3 (Chapter 7) for an introduction to EFA. We set the number of factors to two. As with PCA, we apply a varimax rotation 1, and reflect the factors for enhanced interpretability. Figure 4 shows the loadings of the political dimensions along the factors. We obtain similar structures as with PCA, although we note the greater variability in the absolute value of loadings for the ESS panel. 

## 2.4 Unrotated principal components 

Figure 5 shows the loadings of the first two principal components before applying varimax rotation and before applying reflection. Figure 6 shows how the principal components are rotated by varimax, by plotting the rotated axes in the unrotated PCA space, alongside the (unrotated) loadings of dimensions. 

# 3 Distribution of activity, popularity and visibility 

Figure 7 shows the number of users in each activity, popularity, and visibility bin, in log scale. 

> 1Note that rotating the factors is standard practice for EFA.

4Supplementary information Vendeville et al., 2025 

# X panel ESS panel 

Figure 2: Distribution of users in the PC space. The (PC1,PC2) plane is divided in a 30 × 30 grid. Cells are colored according to the log number of users they contain. 

# 4 Visibility analysis 

This section concerns the analysis of the X panel, where panelists are weighted by their estimated visibility on the platform. We first provide additional results regarding the distribution of positions and the low-dimensional structure weighted X panel. Then, we justify our estimation of visibility by comparing it with impression counts received by the tweets of a subsample of the users. 

## 4.1 Dimension-wise distributions of positions 

We show the weighted distribution of X panelists along the eight political dimensions of interest, compared with the unweighted panel. The results show distributions closer to stances on all dimensions. 

## 4.2 Low-dimensional structure 

When weighting X panelists by their visibility, the low-dimensional structure of political positions does not exhibit important changes. To identify this structure, we first compute a weighted correlation matrix. We then apply PCA on this correlation matrix, performing rotation of reflection of components afterwards to enhance interpretability (see “Methods” in the main text). We show the low-dimensional structure of the weighted X panel in Figure 9 .

## 4.3 Variations along visibility values 

Figure 10 shows how our metrics of interest (polarization, Wasserstein distance, dimensionality, PC1 and PC2 distributions) evolve with visibility. The most visible users exhibit opinion distributions closer to those of the ESS panel (subplot b). The more visible they are, the more left-wing and globalist they get. The only surprising result is the lower effective dimensionality, while the explained variance of PC1 shrinks and that of PC2 grows with visibility. 

## 4.4 Robustness of visibility metric 

To justify our choice of visibility metric, we leverage a database of tweets collected during the whole duration of January and February 2023, obtained by querying all tweets in French containing a URL. That includes tweets containing an image or video. When the tweet was a reply, the whole thread and original tweet were also collected. This database totals about 7.9M tweets, covering 97,947 users of the X panel (10%). In particular, this database contains the impression count of each tweets 2.

> 2As per the API: “A count of how many times the Post has been viewed (not unique by user). A view is counted if any part of the Post is visible on the screen.” ( https://docs.x.com/x-api/fundamentals/metrics ).

5Supplementary information Vendeville et al., 2025 

# X panel ESS panel 

Figure 3: Opinion distributions along PC1 and PC2. The (PC1,PC2) plane is divided in a 30 × 30 grid. Cells are colored according to the average position of the panelists on the corresponding dimension. 

6Supplementary information Vendeville et al., 2025 

> Right Anti immigration Anti gender equality
> Anti environmental policies Anti redistribution
> DirDem+
> DirDem-
> AE+ EU-
> AE-EU+
> Immig+ SocLib+ Env+ Left Redist+
> Redist-Right Env-SocLib-Immig-
> DirDem+ EU-
> Immig+ SocLib+ Left Redist+ Env+
> Redist-Right SocLib-Immig-Env-
> DirDem-EU+
> Left
> Pro immigration
> Pro gender equality
> Pro environmental policies
> Pro redistribution
> High anti-elitism Anti EU Pro direct democracy
> Low anti-elitism
> Pro EU
> Anti direct democracy
> AE+
> AE-

Left-Right divide 

# X panel ESS panel 

Global-Local divide 

Figure 4: Loadings of political dimensions obtained via exploratory factor analysis. Each arrow shows the loading of a political dimension along the first two factors. Arrow length is proportional to the absolute value of the loading. Red-blue arrows correspond to dimensions related to the left-right attitudes, and green-brown arrows correspond to dimensions related to global-local attitudes Plus (+) signs are short for “pro”, and minus (-) signs for “anti”. 

> Right Anti immigration Anti gender equality
> Anti environmental policies Anti redistribution

Left-Right divide 

> DirDem+
> DirDem-
> AE+ EU-
> AE-EU+
> Immig+ SocLib+ Env+ Left Redist+
> Redist-Right Env-SocLib-Immig-

X panel 

> DirDem-EU+
> Immig-SocLib-Right Redist-Env-
> Redist+ Left SocLib+ Immig+ Env+
> DirDem+ EU-

ESS panel 

Global-Local divide 

> Left
> Pro immigration
> Pro gender equality
> Pro environmental policies
> Pro redistribution
> High anti-elitism Anti EU Pro direct democracy
> Low anti-elitism
> Pro EU
> Anti direct democracy AE-
> AE+

Figure 5: Loadings of political dimensions along principal components without rotation or reflectino. Each arrow shows the loading of a political dimension along the first two principal components, PC1 (x-axis) and PC2 (y-axis). Arrow length is proportional to the absolute value of the loading. Red-blue arrows correspond to dimensions related to the left-right attitudes, and green-brown arrows correspond to dimensions related to global-local attitudes Plus (+) signs are short for “pro”, and minus (-) signs for “anti”. 

7Supplementary information Vendeville et al., 2025 

## X panel ESS panel   

> Figure 6: Rotated versus unrotated principal components. The x and y-axis delineate the unrotated principal components. Boxes’ coordinates correspond to the loadings of the dimensions, symmetrized around the origin. Arrows show the coordinates of the rotated principal components.

We compute the total impression count for the users of our X panel that are present in this database. We compare these counts with our visibility metric, defined by tweeting _rate × f ollowers . The tweeting rate is computed on the basis of the number of tweets for which we have impression counts, divided by the number of days spanned by our data (31 in January plus 28 in February). We find a Pearson correlation of 0.92 (p < 0.001) and a Spearman correlation of 0.74 (p < 0.001) . We regress visibility against impression counts in Figure 11 . Because values span several orders of magnitude, we must employ a log scale. Thus, we discard users with visibility=0 (final user count: 97,848). In addition, we analyze unidimensional distributions of positions ( Figure 12 ) and low-dimensional structure of the X panel, weighted by impression counts ( Figure 13 ). The analysis is thus restricted to the 98K users for which we have access to this metric. Results are highly similar to those obtained by using our visibility metric, indicating that it is a good proxy for impression count. 

# 5 Politically active online ESS respondents 

We derive a secondary dataset called ESS-PAO (“politically active online”), by restricting ourselves to ESS respondents who declared having posted online content related to politics (variable name: pstplonl ). We expect this subgroup to exhibit opinions that are closer to those of our X population. 

Figure 14 shows dimension-wise opinion distributions of X panelists and ESS-PAO panelists. Opinion distribution of X panelists are discretized by sorting them into bins, to facilitate comparison with ESS-PAO panelists. Results are similar as for the whole ESS panel, with two noticeable differences. Distributions of opinions for ESS-PAO panelists does not reflect the predominantly right-wing positioning of X users, but better reflects their anti-EU sentiment. Polarization levels in ESS-PAO are slightly higher than in ESS. Surprisingly, the WD values are also (slightly) higher for most dimensions, meaning that unidimensional opinion distributions of the X panel are further away from the subsample of ESS respondents that are politically active online, although we note that more than 

10 , 000 of the 900 , 000 X panelists do not post ( Figure 7 ). 

Figure 15 illustrates the low-dimensional structure of political positions for ESS-PAO panelists. The ESS-PAO panel exhibits stronger correlations than the full ESS panel but fewer are significant, with very few significant correlations between Left-Right and Global-Local attitudes, restricted to EU integration. This leads us to believe that the hypothesized Left-Right and Global-Local divides appear more salient among ESS-PAO respondents than for the whole ESS panel. ESS-PAO exhibits a slightly lower dimensionality than ESS, with six components being sufficient to explain 90% of the variance, meaning that politically active online citizens have slightly more constrained opinions. The overall configuration of dimensions, given by the loadings along principal components, is similar to 8Supplementary information Vendeville et al., 2025 

# a b c 

> Figure 7: Number of users in each activity (a), popularity (b), and visibility (c) bin.

that of ESS panelists. 

# References 

1. Jolly, S. et al. Chapel Hill Expert Survey trend file, 1999-2019. Electoral Stud. 75, 102420 (2022). 2. Hooghe, L. et al. The Russian Threat and the Consolidation of the West: How Populism and EU-skepticism shape party support for Ukraine. Eur. Union Polit. 25 (2024). 3. Jolliffe, I. T. Principal Component Analysis 2nd ed. (Springer-Verlag, New York, NY, 2002). 9Supplementary information Vendeville et al., 2025 

Figure 8: Opinion distributions of X panel, weighted by visibility. Dotted vertical lines indicate the mean. Green: weighted X panel, Red: unweighted X panel. 

10 Supplementary information Vendeville et al., 2025 

# a b 

> Left Redist+ SocLib+ Immig+ Env+
> DirDem-EU+
> EU-DirDem+
> Immig-SocLib-Env-Right Redist-
> AE+
> AE-

# c d

Figure 9: Low-dimensional structure of the X panel, weighted by visibility. (a) Variance explained by principal components. (b) Cumulated variance explained by principal components. (c) Weighted Pearson correlation matrix. All correlations are significant at the level p < 0.001 . (d) Loadings of the political dimensions along the first two principal components. 

11 Supplementary information Vendeville et al., 2025 

# ca bd e

Figure 10: Variation of polarization, representativeness and dimensionality of X panelists with visibility. 

Users are binned according to their estimated visibility ( tweeting _rate × f ollowers ). Dotted lines indicate values computed for the whole panel. (a) Polarization along the different dimensions: in-bin value minus overall value. (b) Wasserstein distance between positions of X users and ESS respondents: in-bin value minus overall value. (c) Average absolute correlation between dimensions within the Left-Right divide (blue circles), within the Global-Local divide (red diamonds), and across the Left-Right and Global-Local divide (green crosses). (d) Average position of users along PC1 (blue circles) and PC2 (red diamonds), with 95% confidence intervals. (e) Effective dimensionality. 

12 Supplementary information Vendeville et al., 2025 

Figure 11: Regression plot between impression count (x-axis) and visibility (y-axis). Grey dots indicate individual values. 

13 Supplementary information Vendeville et al., 2025 

# b ca

Figure 12: Opinion distributions of X panel, weighted by impression counts. Dotted vertical lines indicate the mean. Green: weighted X panel, Red: unweighted X panel. 

14 Supplementary information Vendeville et al., 2025 

# a b

> Left Redist+ SocLib+ Immig+ Env+
> DirDem-EU+
> EU-DirDem+
> Immig-SocLib-Env-Right Redist-
> AE+
> AE-

# c d

Figure 13: Low-dimensional structure of the X panel, weighted by impression count. (a) Variance explained by principal components. (b) Cumulated variance explained by principal components. (c) Weighted correlation matrix. All values are significant at the level p < 0.001 . (d) Loadings of the political dimensions along the first two principal components. 

15 Supplementary information Vendeville et al., 2025 

# b c

# a

Figure 14: Comparison between opinions of X users and ESS-PAO respondents. (a) Histograms of opinion distributions. Dashed vertical lines indicate averages. Colored half-panes in the background mark the side on which the distributions are concentrated. Distributions for the X panel are sorted into bins to facilitate comparison with the ESS panel. (b) Polarization values across dimensions. Brackets indicate groups of dimensions that share the same support, and within which polarization values can be compared. (c) Normalized Wasserstein distance between X and ESS-PAO panelists (purple diamonds), and between X and ESS panelists (blue squares). 

16 Supplementary information Vendeville et al., 2025 

# a b

> Left Redist+ SocLib+ Immig+ Env+
> DirDem-EU+
> EU-DirDem+
> Immig-SocLib-Env-Right Redist-
> AE+
> AE-

# c d

Figure 15: Low-dimensional structure of opinions for ESS-PAO respondents. (a) Explained variance by principal component and effective dimensionality. (b) Cumulated explained variance. (c) Correlation matrix. Percent of significant correlations: 46%, average value of significant off-diagonal correlations: 0.29, strongest off-diagonal correlation: 0.58 (Left-Right and immigration). (d) Loadings of political dimensions along principal components, rotated and reflected to enhance interpretability. 

17