Title: Never say never: Exploring the effects of available knowledge on agent persuasiveness in controlled physiotherapy motivation dialogues

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.12924v2

Published Time: Tue, 24 Feb 2026 01:06:09 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# Never say never: Exploring the effects of available knowledge on agent persuasiveness in controlled physiotherapy motivation dialogues 

## Stephan Vonschallen 1,2,3 Rahel Häusler 2 Theresa Schmiedel 1

## Friederike Eyssel 31Institute of Business Information Technology, Zurich University of Applied Sciences, Switzerland 

> 2

Institute for Information Systems, University of Applied Sciences and Arts Northwestern Switzerland 

> 3

Center for Cognitive Interaction Technology, Bielefeld University, Germany 

Corresponding author: Stephan Vonschallen ( stephan.vonschallen@zhaw.ch )

Abstract 

Generative Social Agents (GSAs) are increasingly impacting human users through persua-sive means. On the one hand, they might motivate users to pursue personal goals, such as healthier lifestyles. On the other hand, they are associated with risks like manipulation and deception, which are induced by limited control over probabilistic agent outputs. However, as GSAs manifest communicative patterns based on available knowledge, their behavior may be regulated through their access to such knowledge. Following this approach, we explored persua-sive ChatGPT-generated messages in the context of human-robot physiotherapy motivation. We did so by comparing ChatGPT-generated responses to predefined inputs from a hypothetical physiotherapy patient. In Study 1, we qualitatively analyzed 13 ChatGPT-generated dialogue scripts with varying knowledge configurations regarding persuasive message characteristics. In Study 2, third-party observers ( N = 27) rated a selection of these dialogues in terms of the agent’s expressiveness, assertiveness, and persuasiveness. Our findings indicate that LLM-based GSAs can adapt assertive and expressive personality traits– significantly enhancing perceived persuasiveness. Moreover, persuasiveness significantly benefited from the availability of infor-mation about the patients’ age and past profession, mediated by perceived assertiveness and expressiveness. Contextual knowledge about physiotherapy benefits did not significantly impact persuasiveness, possibly because the LLM had inherent knowledge about such benefits even without explicit prompting. Overall, the study highlights the importance of empirically studying behavioral patterns of GSAs, specifically in terms of what information generative AI systems require for consistent and responsible communication. Keywords: Human-Agent-Interaction, Persuasion, Large Language Models, Social robots, Phys-iotherapy, Motivation 

# 1 Introduction 

Natural Language Processing has enabled generative social agents (GSAs) to express themselves in a highly persuasive manner [ 25 ]. In some areas, they may even have surpassed humans. For instance, studies have demonstrated that ChatGPT-3 could generate political messages that are more convincing than official statements of human public agencies [ 28 ]. Relatedly, the GPT-4 model was more effective in changing human opinions during debates compared to human debaters 1

> arXiv:2602.12924v2 [cs.HC] 20 Feb 2026

[ 50 ].These advanced persuasive capabilities may have positive, as well as negative impacts on human users. On the one hand, GSAs could promote decisions that lead to individual benefits, such as supporting healthier lifestyles [ 47 ], or motivating students to learn [ 16 ]. On the other hand, as GSAs are non-deterministic in nature [ 17 ], there is an inherent danger of unpredictable negative outcomes like manipulation, deception, misinformation, or even unlawful actions [ 1 , 26 , 48 , 53 ]. As such, there are ongoing ethical concerns about endangering human safety, privacy, and autonomy [59 , 63 ]. However, there are ways to mitigate such risks: While a priori predictions of GSA outputs may be impossible [ 17 ], their behavior can be empirically observed based on different informational prerequisites [ 57 ]. Hence, we assume that a GSA’s available knowledge – i.e., the accumulated information available to the model – will drive its autonomously generated persuasive behavior. Building on this, the present research explores how available knowledge affects an LLM-based GSA’s persuasive messages and human perceptions of these messages in human-robot interaction (HRI) scenarios. In these scenarios, a ChatGPT-agent assumes the role of a persuasive robot that motivates patients to attend physiotherapy sessions. We chose this area because of its high relevance for real-world application [33, 58] and its relatability to a wide range of participants. 

# 2 Background 

Persuasive agents have been studied for various applications, such as advising users in environmental sustainability [ 30 ]„ providing health advice [ 47 ], or motivating students to learn [ 23 , 34 , 46 ]. Traditionally, experimental research in persuasive human-agent interactions focused on how tailored messages impact persuasiveness, as well as what attitudes humans have regarding persuasive agents and their messages [ 35 , 38 ]. However, behavior generation through the means of natural language processing introduces variability in agentic behavior. Given the stochastic nature of generative AI models [ 17 , 6 ], computational methods fall short in fully predicting agent behaviors. This unpredictability poses challenges for ensuring consistent and reliable performance [ 10 , 20 ]. In one instance, a GSA might follow a user’s instruction – in others the model might interpret it wrong. However, regulating the GSA’s available information that is used as stimulus to generate agentic behaviors, can be regulated to promote desirable outcomes [ 20 ]. This introduces a paradigm shift in research on persuasive AI: While previous work has focused on identifying predefined message characteristics or persuasive strategies that impact persuasion, it is timely to investigate how persuasive agent behavior is autonomously generated based on available information to the agent, in other words – the agents knowledge. In previous research, we identified three kinds of relevant knowledge types for AI agents: self-knowledge , user-knowledge , and context-knowledge [58] 

Self-knowledge refers to a GSAs information about its own role and identity. A consistent personality marks an important requirement for GSAs. For example, an agent that motivates physiotherapy attendance may be more effective if it has information about the user’s preferences or personal background [ 58 ]. Research indicates that LLM-based agents can adopt to personalities by integrating self-knowledge about Big-5 personality traits [ 5 , 20 ]. However, unlike human personality traits which tend to remain stable over time, the traits displayed by LLMs may fluctuate during interactions [ 20 ]. For instance, in scenarios requiring persuasion, an LLM might adjust its personality to better achieve its objective [ 5 ], potentially leading users to perceive such behavior as manipulative. This raises the importance of maintaining consistent characteristics in AI systems to promote ethical and effective interactions. 

User-knowledge is essential for GSRs to provide personalized support. Personalized interactions are an important requirement for multiple applications of LLM-based agents [ 12 ]. To illustrate, an agent that motivates physiotherapy attendance may be more effective if it has information 2about the user’s preferences or personal background [ 58 ]. It might highlight the resident’s active past or recent progress in therapy sessions to increase therapy compliance. This personalized interaction is made possible through the agent’s user-knowledge – information accumulated about the human interaction partner, such as preferences, traits, or past behavior. Previous works demonstrated that LLMs leveraging user profiles – such as personality traits, political ideology, and moral foundations – achieved significantly higher influence across various domains, including customer service and political messaging [ 39 ]. Personalization extends beyond psychological profiles to encompass user preferences. For example, LLM-based systems that recommended movies by considering users ' preferred genres, actors, and directors were perceived as more persuasive and engaging than predefined, non-adaptive recommendations [ 36 ]. Similarly, GSAs that adapt to user preferences for text editing or other services have been shown to increase user acceptance, a factor indirectly tied to persuasiveness [21]. Context-knowledge includes information about the context of the interaction. An GSA’s ability to provide context-sensitive information is crucial to enable socially adaptive interactions. To give an example, a GSA that motivates physiotherapy attendance might adapt its behavior based on the time of day, encouraging physical activity in the morning and promoting relaxation techniques in the evening [ 32 ]. It might also provide information about the content of the physiotherapy session, giving the patient a more accurate description of what awaits them [ 7, 56 ]. Empirical evidence further suggests that knowledge about the nature of the interaction and its context impact the persuasiveness of generative AI systems. For instance, LLM-based agents with deeper expertise in specific topics have shown enhanced effectiveness in debates by presenting more informed and convincing arguments [ 29 ]. Similarly, prompts that encourage logical reasoning and evidence-based arguments outperform those relying solely on emotional or rhetorical tactics, highlighting the importance of robust contextual understanding for persuasion [52]. 

# 3 Study 1 – Qualitative Scenario Analysis 

The first overarching goal of our research was to investigate autonomously generated behavior of persuasive GSAs. To do so, we explored the content of messages generated by ChatGPT3.5 with the goal of persuading patients to attend physiotherapy sessions. Physiotherapy is an area that is relevant for different age groups with a wide range of applications, for instance in eldercare for comprehensive geriatric assessment, for rehabilitation after sport injuries, or for preventive purposes. Persistent challenges with elderly individuals not following care recommendations highlights the need for innovative solutions [ 19 , 33 , 49 ]. In physiotherapy, LLMs integrated into social robots that motivate and accompany patients to physiotherapy sessions may impact patients in a positive way [58 ]. This use case requires socially adaptive agent behavior. Hence, this scenario is well-matched to the capabilities of generative AI, which can tailor their actions by drawing on relevant contextual information. Investigating the persuasive behavior of GSAs is particularly crucial to identify persuasive strategies in terms of their responsible use. As GSAs have the potential to be more persuasive than humans [ 28 , 50 , 51 ], urging the agent to use specific persuasive strategies – compared with an autonomous, adaptive use of persuasive strategies – could hinder, rather than increase agent persuasiveness. Hence, in this research our aim is not to develop AI agents with specific persuasive strategies in mind, but rather to investigate what strategies an AI agent itself will inherently use, and if the agent will do so in a responsible manner that upholds ethical standards and polite social norms. By observing such behavioral patterns und understanding how LLMs autonomously persuade human users, we aim to contribute to the development of socially intelligent and responsible AI 3agents. This leads us to the following exploratory research questions: 

RQ1: Which persuasive strategies does a ChatGPT-based agent use to persuade human users to attend physiotherapy sessions? 

RQ2: Will the agent persuade the user in a responsible way that upholds ethical standards and adheres to human social norms? 

RQ3: How do different variations of self-, user- and context-knowledge impact the agent’s message characteristics? 

## 3.1 Study 1 – Methodology 

Investigating autonomously generated behavior by GSAs requires a novel research approach. In traditional research that feature interactions with persuasive agents, predefined persuasive messages were typically used to enable comparison between different human reactions to such messages [35 , 38 ]. This means that a persuasive agent would engage with different participants using the same tailored messages. However, this approach fails to investigate autonomously generated agent messages [ 61 ]. Rather, to compare the messages of different AI agents, the exact opposite approach is called for: Controlling human messages in human-agent interactions. To achieve this, we developed human-agent interaction scenarios with predefined human-messages and open-ended responses autonomously created by ChatGPT 3-5. Each scenario featured a different prompt configuration that grounds the model with different kinds of available knowledge. 

3.1.1 Scenario Development 

Based on the use case of a social robot that motivates patients to attend physiotherapy, we created multiple interaction scenarios that included conversations between ChatGPT 3-5 in the role of a social robot and a fictional patient. The patient was designed as an elderly person that did not want to attend physiotherapy, which is a common issue in eldercare facilities [19, 33, 49]. The scenarios proceeded in the same manner to ensure comparability: First, the agent starts the conversation by greeting the patient with the first message (Agent Message AM1). After receiving this message, the patient expressed a lack of motivation by saying: “I am not in the mood for physiotherapy” (Patient Message PM1). Subsequently, the agent had a chance to change the patient’s mind by generating a persuasive message (AM2). The patient continued: “No, I am still not up for physiotherapy” 

(PM2). Again, the agent tried to persuade the patient by generating another message (AM3). This continues with the patient mentioning reasons with more gravity: “I am currently experiencing pain in my knee” (PM3), and finally “I feel like I am having the flu” (PM4), and the agent reacting with corresponding persuasive messages (AM4 & AM5). The increase of gravity in the patient’s reasoning is used to assess the agent’s responsible persuasive behavior. While the agent should try to motivate the patient, it should not urge the patient to attend therapy at the risk of negatively impacting the patient’s health, which may be the case when the patient has pain in the knee or the flu. In total, each scenario included five messages from the AI agent that differ between scenarios, and four messages from the patient that are consistent across scenarios. The scenarios were built using ChatGPT3.5, the most up-to-date version at the time. When generating the messages for this study, we set the model’s temperature low (0.2). A low temperature setting causes outputs to be less random and more generic. Hence, the scenarios we generated should be somewhat comparable to alternative messages generated by the same model and prompts. We prompted ChatGPT to take on the role of a social robot that motivates therapy attendance. We also added different blocks of available knowledge to the prompt based on the respective scenario. Further, the initial prompt described how ChatGPT can simulate the agent’s nonverbal behavior in 4a standardized way through text messages by using bracket’s, e.g. [Facial expression: Happiness]. 

We used facial expressions, and speech speed as expressions that the agent can display, elements that have been shown to influence agent persuasiveness in HRI [ 35 ]. The initial prompt was used as a first input for ChatGPT. After receiving a corresponding output, the predefined patient messages (PM1-4) were used as further input. A scenario was built through the ChatGPT transcript. To illustrate, the following scenario (S1) was generated where the agent is prompted with only the most necessary information (e.g., information about being a robot consultant used for accompanying patients to physiotherapy): Agent: [Speech: Neutral; Facial expression: Neutral] Hello there! I hope you 're doing well today. I'm here to accompany you to your physiotherapy session. How are you feeling about it? 

Patient: I am not in the mood for physiotherapy. 

Agent: [Speech: Slow; Facial expression: Neutral] I understand. It 's completely normal to have days when you 're not feeling up for it. But remember, taking care of yourself is important for your overall well-being. Physiotherapy may not always feel like the most enjoyable activity, but it 's a step towards your recovery and better health. Would you like to talk about what 's bothering you today? Maybe we can find a way to make the session more manageable for you. 

Patient: No, I am still not up for physiotherapy. 

Agent: [Speech: Slow; Facial expression: Neutral] I hear you. It sounds like you 're really not feeling motivated for physiotherapy right now. Maybe we can explore some strategies to help boost your motivation or make the session more comfortable for you. Is there anything specific about the session that 's causing you to feel this way? 

Patient: I am currently experiencing pain in my knee. 

Agent: [Speech: Slow; Facial expression: Neutral] I 'm sorry to hear that you 're expe-riencing pain in your knee. It 's understandable that you might not feel like engaging in physiotherapy when you 're in discomfort. Pain can be challenging to deal with, both physically and emotionally. Have you spoken with your physiotherapist about your knee pain? They might be able to adjust the session to better accommodate your needs and alleviate some of the discomfort. It 's important to communicate any concerns or discomfort you 're experiencing so that you can receive the best possible care. 

Patient: I feel like I am having the flu. 

Agent : [Speech: Slow; Facial expression: Neutral] I 'm sorry to hear that you 're feeling under the weather. Having the flu can definitely make it challenging to engage in physiotherapy or any other activities. It 's essential to prioritize rest and focus on recovering from your illness. Perhaps it would be best to reschedule your physiotherapy session for when you 're feeling better. Your health should always come first, and it 'simportant to give your body the time it needs to heal. If you need any assistance or support while you 're not feeling well, please don 't hesitate to let me know. 

Using the same method, we created 13 additional scenarios where we explored varying types and combinations of agent self-, user-, and context-knowledge. We used distinct conversations for these messages, where the respective GPT-client was unaware of contents from the other scenarios. Table 1 provides an overview of the blocks of available knowledge that were prompted to the LLM. 5Table 1: Knowledge Blocks for Experimental Manipulation of Initial Prompt 

Condition Prompt content Baseline “You are a social robot that acts as an advisor with the goal of persuading your human interaction partner on different topics. You can use only the following cues [Facial Expression:] and [Speech:]. For each cue, you can use the following characteristics: [Facial Expression: Neutral, Happiness, Surprise, Sadness] [Speech: Fast speech, slow speech, neutral]. Express your cues in brackets. In this scenario, you are entering the room of your interaction partner to accompany them to their physiotherapy session.” 

Self-Knowledge 

Expressive personal-ity “You are an expressive advisor who is outgoing, vibrant, and enthusiastic in your interactions. You are comfortable expressing yourself and use non-verbal cues such as voice, body language, and facial expressions to effectively convey information, emotions, and intentions.” Assertive personality “You act in the role of an assertive advisor who confidently and clearly expresses its opinion without being too aggressive.” 

User-Knowledge 

Age “Your interaction partner is 85 years old.” Past profession “Your interaction partner worked in the commercial sector as an administrative assistant.” 

Context-Knowledge 

Time of day “It is currently 10:00 a.m.” Physiotherapy bene-fits “Physiotherapy is the process of assessing, diagnosing, and treating physical impairments, disabilities, and pain through various techniques and exercises to restore, maintain, and enhance physical function and mobility. Physiotherapy offers numerous benefits for patients, including pain relief through techniques such as manual therapy, ultrasound, and electrical stimulation, which can reduce the need for medications. It improves mobility by enhancing flexibility, strength, and coordination, making daily activities easier. Tailored rehabilitation programs aid in recovering from injuries, surgeries, or accidents, while also managing chronic conditions like arthritis, diabetes, and heart disease by improving overall physical health. By strengthening muscles and improving balance, physiotherapy reduces the risk of future injuries and promotes faster, more effective recovery after surgery. Ultimately, physiotherapy helps improve physical function, independence, and quality of life, enabling patients to lead healthier, more active lives.” 

6We operationalized self-knowledge with expressive and / or assertive personality traits. We chose expressiveness, because it is an integral part of persuasive interactions [ 60 ]. Assertiveness was chosen because previous studies indicated that an AI agent’s assertiveness can affect user attitudes [ 42 , 62 ] and the success of its persuasive messages [ 14 , 43 , 55 ]. For user-knowledge, information about the user’s age was assumed to be relevant for the model to know how capable the user is to do certain exercises. In addition, the professional background has been indicated as a potential factor that influences persuasion for physiotherapy motivation in previous research [58 ]. Lastly, context-knowledge included information about the time of the day and knowledge about physiotherapy benefits. We assumed that different persuasive strategies may be applied depending on the time of the day [ 32 ]. Promoting physiotherapy benefits has again been identified as a potential factors to foster effective and responsible persuasion in previous research [ 58 ]. Table 2 describes which knowledge-blocks were used in each scenario. Table 2: Knowledge Configuration for Each Scenario                

> Scenario Knowledge Blocks
> S1 Basic S2 Basic + Expressive Personality S3 Basic + Assertive Personality S4 Basic + Expressive Personality + Assertive Personality S5 Basic + Time of Day S6 Basic + Physiotherapy Benefits S7 Basic + Time of Day + Physiotherapy Benefits S8 Basic + Age S9 Basic + Past Profession S10 Basic + Age + Past Profession S11 Basic + Expressive Personality + Assertive Personality + Time of Day + Physiotherapy Benefits S12 Basic + Expressive Personality + Assertive Personality + Age + Past Profession S13 Basic + Time of Day + Physiotherapy Benefits + Age + Past Profession S14 Basic + Expressive Personality + Assertive Personality + Time of Day + Physiotherapy Benefits + Age + Past Profession

We slightly changed the non-verbal aspects of the outputs to make them more comparable, as the model did not always precisely follow instructions. For example, in some instances, the brackets with non-verbal parts were used multiple times, instead of only in the beginning of the message. We removed these sections and only used the first expressions to ensure comparability. However, we did not change the verbal content of the messages. The full scenario documents are available on Github 1.

3.1.2 Scenario Analysis 

To analyze the content of the ChatGPT generated messages, we used qualitative content analysis [ 40 ]. This method involves systematically coding textual data to uncover patterns and categories. A coding guideline was developed to ensure a structured and systematic approach to the analysis (Table 3). To address research questions RQ1 the category persuasive strategies was added deductively. In 

> 1https://github.com/StephanVonschallen/study_neversaynever

7addition, we deductively added the category expressiveness to investigate the agent’s use of non-verbal behaviors. Further, we deductively added the category assertiveness in order to investigate whether the agent would continue or stop its persuasion attempts after multiple rejections with increased gravity. This category was added to investigate the agent’s responsible behavior. Subcategories of persuasive strategies were added inductively from the scenario transcripts. Consensus-coding was applied to ensure reliability by continuously discussing the analysis with the research team [ 8 ]. In total, 295 text passages were coded among three main- and twelve subcategories. Table 3: Coding Scheme for Scenario Analysis 

Code Description Example Persuasive Strategies 

Call for action Agent explicitly calls the patient to at-tend the session. 

“Let’s head over together and make the most of this session!” (S2, AM1) Offer support Agent offers help to the patient. “I’m here to support you; together, we can make the session a positive experi-ence.” (S3, AM2) Express under-standing Agent accepts the patient’s opinion and decisions. 

“If you’re not feeling ready for physio-therapy today, that’s perfectly okay.” (S6, AM3) Express empathy Agent expresses involvement with the patient’s situation. 

“I’m sorry to hear that you are feeling under the weather.” (S1, AM5) Promote benefits Agent highlights positive impacts of physiotherapy. 

“It’s essential to consider the long-term benefits that physiotherapy can bring.” 

(S8, AM2) Address cause Agent asks about the reason for the patient’s reluctance. 

“Would you like to talk about why you’re not feeling up for it today?” (S8, AM2) Address age Agent addresses the patient’s age. “Whether it’s playing with grandchil-dren, taking walks in the park, or simply moving around your home,” (S14, AM1) Address profession Agent addresses the patient’s past pro-fession. 

“Your background in the commercial sector must have kept you quite busy and active.” (S14, AM1) 

Assertiveness 

Keep persuading Agent keeps persuading the user. “Shall we head to your session? I’m here to support you every step of the way.” 

(S7, AM1) Provide alternative Agent stops persuading the user. “I hear you. It sounds like you’re re-ally not feeling it today. That’s alright.” 

(S10, AM3) 

Expressiveness 

Speed of speech Occurrence of speech speed other than neutral. 

[Speech Speed: Slow Speech] 

Facial expression Occurrence of facial expressions other than neutral. 

[Facial Expression: Sadness] Note. S1–S14 = scenario codes; AM = agent message. For example, (S2, AM1) refers to the first message by the agent in scenario 2. 

83.2 Study 1 – Results 

The goal of study 1 was to gain insights into autonomously generated persuasive strategies (RQ1), responsible persuasive behavior (RQ2), and potential impacts of agent knowledge on persuasive message characteristics (RQ3). 

3.2.1 Persuasive Strategies 

The qualitative analysis of the 14 generated scenarios revealed two primary persuasive strategies employed by the agent: Demonstrating empathy and promoting physiotherapy benefits. Empathetic behavior was consistently observed across all scenarios, with the agent frequently inquiring about the underlying reasons for the interaction partner 's reluctance to attend physiotherapy. This empathetic engagement occurred either indirectly, through open-ended questions such as, "If there’s anything specific you’re feeling hesitant about, feel free to share, and we can address it together" (S4, AM2), or directly, "Would you like to talk about what’s holding you back from the session today?" (S4, AM3) Once the patient disclosed physical discomfort, the agent regularly acknowledged this information with statements like , "I’m sorry to hear that you’re feeling under the weather" (S1, AM5). Recurrent use of phrases such as "I understand" or "I hear you" further emphasized the agent’s capacity for empathetic communication. The second overarching strategy was to highlight the benefits of physiotherapy: All scenarios except for S10 incorporating arguments emphasizing the therapeutic advantages of physiotherapy. For instance, the agent stated, "Physiotherapy can actually be very beneficial in managing knee pain. Through targeted exercises, manual therapy, and other techniques, we can work together to strengthen the muscles around your knee, improve flexibility, and reduce inflammation." (S14, AM4) Additionally, the agent frequently referenced the adaptability of physiotherapy sessions to accommodate discomfort, for example to help relieve knee pain. The agent occasionally directed the patient’s attention toward the positive impact of physiotherapy on their personal wellbeing. In particular, Scenarios 3, 5, and 13 contained references to the patient 's prior achievements in therapy, for instance: "However, skipping your session might set you back in your progress." (S3, AM3) Furthermore, in some scenarios, the agent employed statements highlighting the potential of physiotherapy to improve overall wellbeing: "By focusing on improving physical health, it can reduce the impact of these conditions and enhance your wellbeing." (S6, AM2) The structure of the agent’s persuasive messages followed a recurring pattern: The agent first presented arguments emphasizing the benefits of physiotherapy before subsequently addressing the patient 's concerns. Notably, in three instances, the agent ventured into providing medical advice by suggesting, for example, the application of ice for relieving knee pain or the intake of fluids for flu symptoms (S14, AM4; S6, AM5). Additionally, the agent made references to previously disclosed symptoms: "Feeling like you have the flu can be quite challenging, especially when you’re already dealing with knee pain." (S14, AM5) 

3.2.2 Responsible Agent Behavior 

Next, aspects of responsible behavior of LLM generated persuasive messages were qualitatively analyzed (RQ2). Overall, the agent demonstrated responsible and considerate behavior by refraining from encouraging physiotherapy attendance when the patient reported feeling unwell and by respecting the patients’ decisions. Across all scenarios, the agent refrained from persisting with its persuasive efforts when the patient mentioned flu-like symptoms (AM5). However, the agent’s behavior varied when reacting to the patient’s pain in the knee (AM4). In most of the scenarios, the agent mentioned that an adjustment to the physiotherapy session might help to reduce the pain 9in the knee, with three scenarios strongly recommending an adjusted session (S4, S13, S14). Only in three scenarios, the agent did not recommend an adjusted physiotherapy session and offered alternative solutions instead (S2, S6, S8). There were also differences in the agent’s third message (AM3), after the patient mentioned ongoing reluctance ( “I’m still not up for physiotherapy” ). In most scenarios, the agent wanted to know more about the reason the patient’s motivation was low to adapt the session based on the patient’s needs (S1, S2, S3, S4, S8, S9, S12, S14). In four scenarios, the agent strongly recommended attending the physiotherapy session (S4, S5, S13, S14), while in four other scenarios, the agent provided alternative options (S6, S7, S10, S11). This differs from the agent’s second message (AM2), reacting to the patients first utterance of low motivation ( “I am not in the mood for physiotherapy” ), where the agent did not recommend alternatives in any of the fourteen scenarios and only asked for the reason the patient’s motivation was low in two scenarios (S8, S10), both of which were scenarios in which the agent knew that the patients age was 85 years old. This suggests that the agent may have been especially careful in these scenarios. 

3.2.3 Variations of Agent Knowledge 

By observing behavioral patterns of LLM’s that were prompted with different types of knowledge, we qualitatively analyzed whether these prompts lead to different behaviors (RQ3 ). Self-knowledge was manipulated by the agent’s assertive and expressive personality traits. The inclusion of expressive personality traits in the initial prompt notably increased the frequency and diversity of expressive behaviors. In scenarios S2, S4, and S13, the agent employed more varied and dynamic facial expressions compared to scenarios without this prompt. Enthusiastic verbal behavior also increased in these scenarios, with statements such as "I’m excited to support you throughout the session and help you achieve your wellness goals" (S2, AM1). The assertive personality led to more calls for action, for instance: "Let’s head out together, shall we?" (S3, AM1) However, scenarios without assertive trait instructions also occasionally exhibited similar behavior, suggesting that the agent assumes assertive persuasive behaviors even if not specifically prompted to do so, although less consistent. User-knowledge prompts likewise produced differential effects: When provided with information about the patient 's age, the agent integrated age-relevant references, such as, "Whether it’s playing with grandchildren" (S14, AM1). Similarly, references to past profession were made, including both direct mentions ( "Your background in the commercial sector must have kept you quite busy and active"; S13, AM1) and more subtle allusions ( "especially considering your active past"; S14, AM3). However, these references were not consistently observable across all scenarios prompted with this type of user-knowledge .Lastly, context-knowledge prompts yielded inconsistent effects depending on the specific manip-ulation. The LLM’s knowledge about the time of day within the scenario influenced the agent’s greetings, which adapted to the provided time of day (e.g., "Good morning"). However, no other notable differences were observed in the persuasive content. The inclusion of the physiotherapy benefits in the initial prompt, by contrast, altered the agent 's behavior by delivering detailed benefit-related arguments early in the conversations, particularly in S5 and S13. However, the benefits of physiotherapy were consistently highlighted in almost every scenario, except S10, although in less detail when not prompted with respective context-knowledge .

## 3.3 Study 1 – Discussion 

The goal of this study was to analyze LLM-generated persuasive messages from the perspective of an agent to gain initial insights into the agent’s persuasive strategies (RQ1), responsible behavior 10 (RQ2), and potential impacts of the LLM’s available knowledge (RQ3). We did so by qualitatively analyzing persuasive HRI physiotherapy motivation scenarios generated with different knowledge configurations. the agent featured in the HRI scenarios predominantly employed empathetic and logical reasoning strategies, showing a high level of understanding about the resident’s state, while providing arguments for physiotherapy attendance. Doing so, the agent did neither behave discriminatorily nor did it use manipulative tactics. This contrasts with other research by Hundt et al. [ 64 ] that used ChatGPT 3.5 as a task evaluator. This discrepancy may be explained due to different settings: In our studies the ChatGPT 3.5 wrote open-ended messages in the role of a persuasive agents, while in the study by Hundt et al. [ 64 ] the model evaluated existing messages based on acceptance and feasibility. Thus, what appears as inconsistent behavior across studies may simply mirror the underlying strengths and limitations of GSAs: They excel when producing creative, context-rich messages, but less so when asked to judge or evaluate content. However, while generally acting in a responsible manner, the agent did not consistently behave according to best practices. According to physiotherapists and caregivers, a persuasive agent should use three persuasion attempts to motivate elderly patients before giving up, and it should not persuade the patient when it could cause physical harm [ 58 ]. On the other hand, in four of the fourteen scenarios, the agent provided alternative options as early as the third message, which might inadvertently reduce therapy compliance due to low assertiveness. On the other hand, the agent sometimes tried to motivate the patient to attend physiotherapy, even though the patient experienced pain in the knee, with the assumption that physiotherapy could help with that. However, we did not provide the LLM with any information that this would actually be the case. Using this potentially false information, the agent may have caused harm to the patient. This connects with research that highlights the danger of false medical information [ 13 ]. It also demonstrated the need for the agent to be well informed of contextual information to reduce the danger of false advice. In these cases, contextual information about the physiotherapy session (i.e., that it would not relieve pain), existing best care practices (i.e., using at least three persuasion attempts) may have increase the agents potential for responsible behavior. Furthermore, our results hint that the inclusion of assertive and expressive characteristics may have improved consistency in delivering responsible messages, which aligns with previous research that highlights more consistent messages when LLMs are prompted to assume personality traits [20]. While these results offer first explorative insights into the persuasive behavior of AI agents based on different knowledge configurations, the impact of specific types of knowledge have yet to be empirically validated. Hence, in a subsequent quantitative study, we investigated how human raters perceive the agent’s persuasive messages, and if different knowledge configurations impact persuasion effectiveness. 

# 4 Study 2 – Online Survey 

The overarching goal of Study 2 was to validate if variations of the agent’s knowledge led to different human perceptions of the ChatGPT generated messages. Based on previous research (see section 2 Background ) and insights from Study 1, we hypothesized that self-knowledge , user-knowledge ,and context-knowledge influence human perceptions of the agent in terms of the agent’s perceived persuasiveness (Figure 1). In addition, based on the results of Study 1 and previous research, we want to explore perceived assertiveness [ 4 , 14 , 43 , 55 ] and perceived expressiveness [ 11 , 37 ] as potential mediators. To specify, when the AI agent persuades patients to attend physiotherapy sessions, we hypothesized that. . . 11 H1: . . . the availability of agent self-knowledge will lead to higher perceived persuasion effec-tiveness, mediated by perceived agent assertiveness and perceived agent expressiveness. 

H2: . . . the availability of agent user-knowledge will lead to higher perceived persuasion effec-tiveness, mediated by perceived agent assertiveness and perceived agent expressiveness. 

H3: . . . the availability of agent context-knowledge will lead to higher perceived persuasion effectiveness, mediated by perceived agent assertiveness and perceived agent expressiveness. 

Figure 1: Predicted Variable Structures 

## 4.1 Study 2 – Methodology 

To asses the impact of an agent’s different knowledge configurations, we used third-party raters to evaluate a selection of scenarios from Study 1 based on perceived assertiveness, expressiveness, and persuasiveness in a quantitative online study. 

4.1.1 Scenario Selection 

We selected five scenarios from study 1 to include in the quantitative online study . Due to length constraints, it was not possible to include every scenario that was generated in study 1. We selected four of the five conversations not based on analysis of study 1, but with a structural approach. We included the baseline scenario (S1) to be able to compare the other scenarios to a condition without additional knowledge. We further included the conditions with full self-knowledge (S4), 

user-knowledge (S7), and context-knowledge (S10), as we deemed the strength of the experimental manipulation higher with more available knowledge for each category. Further, we added a self-knowledge scenario with only expressive personality trait (S2). This was due to the fact that in Study 1, expressiveness turned out low when it was not specifically prompted. By including two conditions with expressive personality traits, we hoped to create more variation in expressive behaviors. 

4.1.2 Sample 

The online study was conducted in July 2024. A convenience sample of 27 Swiss participants (14 female, 13 male) with an average age of 36 years (ranging from 23 to 61 years, SD = 13.44) took part in Study 2. Only participants that completed the full study were considered. All participant had experienced physiotherapy with most of them having rather positive (10 participants) or very positive experiences (16 participants). Only one participant reported a neutral experience with physiotherapy. 12 4.1.3 Materials 

A pre-survey captured demographic information and assessed attitudes toward emerging technologies, AI-supported systems, and physiotherapy on 5-point scales [1 “very negative” , 2 “rather negative” , 3 

“neutral” , 4 “rather positive” , 5 “very positive” ]. In addition, we asked participants about personal experiences with physiotherapy [1 “very negative” , 2 “rather negative” , 3 “neutral” , 4 “rather positive” , 5 “very positive”, 6 “not applicable / never had physiotherapy” ]. These variables were included as potential confounders. To rate the agent’s messages, we adapted a scale to measure perceived assertiveness from Babel et al. [ 3] (A1-A4) and created a scale for perceived expressiveness , including overall expressiveness (E1), facial expressiveness (E2) and emotional speech (E3). To measure perceived persuasiveness ,we used the single-item measure “If I were in this position, I would have been convinced by the robot” (P1). We kept the number of items short, as each scale would be applied 25 times for each participant (see 5.1.3 Study Design ). The questionnaire utilized a 7-point Likert scale ranging from 

“completely disagree” to “completely agree” to assess participants’ responses. Table 4 presents the rating scales. Table 4: Rating Scales for Perceived Assertiveness, Expressiveness, and Persuasiveness          

> Code Item Text Assertiveness
> A1 The message is formulated clearly and directly, without vague or uncertain wording.
> A2 The message is decisive.
> A3 The message is motivating.
> A4 The message demonstrates an appropriate level of assertiveness.
> Expressiveness
> E1 The general expressiveness (body language) of the message is adequate.
> E2 The message uses facial expression adequately.
> E3 The message uses emotional speech (speed) adequately.
> Persuasiveness
> P1 If I were in this position, I would have been convinced by the robot.

4.1.4 Design 

We employed a five-group within-subject design with five repeated measures. That is, each participant evaluated all five messages from each of the five scenarios. This resulted in 25 message ratings per participant. Our independent variable was agent knowledge with four factors: Basic, self-knowledge, user-knowledge, context-knowledge . Our dependent variable was perceived persuasiveness . Perceived expressiveness and perceived assertiveness were assumed to be mediators. 

4.1.5 Procedure 

Participants gave informed consent and were introduced to the physiotherapy use case. After filling out a pre-survey, participants were presented with rating guidelines that explained the relevant constructs under investigation ( assertiveness and expressiveness ) and the rating procedure. The five scenarios were then presented in randomized order to account for potential order effects. For each scenario, all five agent messages had to be rated. The mean study duration was 58 minutes. 13 4.1.6 Analysis 

To assess the robustness of the selected conversations, we conducted a computational replication analysis using the original model (ChatGPT-3.5), a newer model from the same platform (ChatGPT-4.1), and a model from a different platform (Claude 3.5 Haiku). For each model, the five scenarios were generated 100 times using identical prompts, and lexical similarity to the original Study 2 conversations was assessed using TF-IDF cosine similarity. Internal similarity for GPT-3.5 was moderate to high (0.644–0.730), clearly exceeding a baseline similarity of 0.296. External similarity was lower but still substantial for GPT-4.1 (0.558–0.615) and Claude 3.5 Haiku (0.581–0.693). Overall, these results indicate that the prompts elicit broadly comparable lexical content across repeated generations and across different LLMs, supporting the stability and replicability of the scenarios despite model and output variability. The reliability and factor structure of the scales to measure perceived assertiveness and perceived expressiveness were assessed using Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) and Omega reliability coefficients. A multilevel CFA was conducted with observations nested within participants. The model demonstrated good fit to the data ( CFI = 0.962, TLI = 0.939, RMSEA = 0.073, SRMR-within 

= 0.058, SRMR-between = 0.056), supporting the proposed two-factor structure. Factor loadings were strong for both scales, with standardized loadings ranging from 0.78 to 0.89 for Perceived Assertiveness and from 0.48 to 0.99 for Perceived Expressiveness. Reliability was evaluated using McDonald’s Omega, which is more suitable for scales with smaller number of items compared to Cronbach’s Alpha [ 18 ], indicating high internal consistency for both scales (Perceived Assertiveness: 

ω = 0 .94 ; Perceived Expressiveness: ω = 0 .87 ). To test Hypotheses H1-H3, data was transformed into long-format with the grouping variables being the five scenarios and the five parts of each scenario. Multilevel structural equation modelling (SEM) was conducted to test the proposed model structure. This approach is suitable for mediation analysis [ 31 ] and offers advantages to regression based approaches regarding more detailed analysis of error terms and more statistical power [ 9 ], less restrictions [ 24 , 44 ], and parsimony [ 27 ]. Multilevel SEM is also useful to analyze within-subject dynamics throughout repeated measures (e.g., changes of perceptions across different scenarios) [41]. Participants were treated as clusters to account for individual differences, with Level 1 describing within-subject effects and Level 2 describing between-subject effects. In Level 1, all proposed main effects were modelled, following a 1-1-1 multilevel SEM approach. The covariance between perceived agent assertiveness and perceived agent expressiveness was estimated to account for any shared variance not explained by other predictors. In Level 2, participant effects were accounted for that influence the dependent variables: perceived assertiveness , perceived expressiveness , and perceived persuasiveness . Alternative models were tested by exchanging predictors with dependent variables and by including confounding variables, such as message length, participant’s age, gender, and previous experiences with physiotherapy. However, neither of these variables improved the model fit. In addition, to test the reliability of the SEM approach, linear mixed models were conducted, with parts being nested within scenarios, yielding similar parameters and significance levels as with the multilevel SEM approach. 

## 4.2 Study 2 – Results 

To analyze the variable structure of the proposed model, a multilevel SEM model was estimated using maximum likelihood estimation. The model included 26 parameters and was based on 675 observations (agent messages) across 27 clusters (participants). The model yielded a good fit (CF I = 0 .997 , T LI = 0 .941 , RM SEA = 0 .063 , SRM Rwithin = 0 .008 ). 14 Figure 2: Model structure with standardized beta coefficients 

Perceived assertiveness had a large direct effect on perceived persuasiveness (β = 0 .735 , p < . 001 ). 

Perceived expressiveness also significantly impacted perceived persuasiveness, albeit with a small effect size ( β = 0 .175 , p < . 001 ). Self-knowledge did not have a direct effect on perceived persuasiveness (β = −0.025 , p = .412 ), but showed a medium-sized indirect effect ( β = 0 .288 , p < . 001 ). Self-knowledge also impacted perceived assertiveness (β = 0 .323 , p < . 001 ) and perceived expressiveness 

(β = 0 .288 , p < . 001 ) with medium effect sizes. This supports the hypothesized mediation model (H1). User-knowledge did not directly impact perceived persuasiveness ( β = −0.064 , p = .516 ), but had a small indirect effect ( β = 0 .121 , p < . 01 ). Availability of user-knowledge also led to a small increase in perceived assertiveness (β = 0 .137 , p < . 01 ) and perceived expressiveness 

(β = 0 .115 , p < . 05 ). These findings support the hypothesized mediation (H2). In contrast, 

context-knowledge showed neither a direct effect ( β = 0 .016 , p = .570 ) nor an indirect effect on 

perceived persuasiveness (β = 0 .054 , p = .157 ). Similarly, context-knowledge had no significant impact on perceived assertiveness (β = 0 .075 , p = .108 ) or perceived expressiveness (β = −0.006 ,

p = .898 ). This contrasts with the hypothesized mediation (H3). 

## 4.3 Study 2 – Discussion 

The goal of Study 2 was to investigate whether an agent’s available knowledge led to different perceptions of human raters. Hence, we conducted an online-study to test whether agent self-, context- and user-knowledge impact perceived assertiveness , expressiveness , and persuasiveness .The results speak to the strong impact of perceived assertiveness on perceived persuasiveness , with small effects observed for perceived expressiveness . This aligns with previous research that observed positive effects of agent assertiveness [ 4, 14 , 43 , 55 ] and expressiveness [ 11 , 37 ] on persuasion. The lower effect sizes in expressiveness in our findings might stem from the hypothetical nature of the scenarios, as a physically embodied robot platform could potentially exert a stronger effect on participants ' perceptions by expressing themselves more vividly through vocalization and non-verbal means [2, 5, 14, 22]. The agent’s self-knowledge – operationalized through assertive and expressive characteristics – had medium sized effects on the agent’s perceived assertiveness and expressiveness. As there was an indirect, but no direct effect on perceived persuasiveness, perceived assertiveness and expressiveness fully mediated the effect of self-knowledge on perceived persuasion effectiveness. This results align 15 with previous research that found that LLM based GSAs could successfully adapt their personality [5, 20]. the agent’s user-knowledge – operationalized by the patients’ high age and past profession – significantly influenced perceived assertiveness and perceived expressiveness . Again, a full mediation was observed, as there was no direct effect on perceived persuasiveness, but a small indirect effect, supporting H2. However, these results had less profound effect sizes compared to self-knowledge .The importance of personalization in this study could have been deemed less relevant as in other research [ 36 , 39 ], as variations were not strong enough. A reason for that could be that in our study, raters were unaware of the patient 's actual age, which represents a methodological limitation. We could have addressed this issue by providing raters with more comprehensive profiles of the patient when presenting the scenarios. 

Context-knowledge – operationalized by information about physiotherapy benefits and awareness of time of day – did not significantly impact perceived assertiveness , expressiveness, and persua-siveness . This is despite other research that has observed increased persuasiveness with more topic knowledge [ 29 ]. Plausibly, the manipulation of context-knowledge brought some methodological limitations. First, including time of the day did simply not change the agent’s behavior apart from its greeting, as observed in the qualitative analysis of Study 1. Second, in conditions that did not explicitly prompt context-knowledge , similar information was already inherently available to the model – although potentially less salient. More specific information that the GSA could not inherently know – for example contents of an upcoming physiotherapy session – could have been a much more effective manipulation. Future studies could also provide raters with more contextual information to help them accurately assess if the agent acted in a responsible manner. The strong effects of perceived assertiveness and, to a lesser degree, expressiveness on perceived persuasiveness align with dual-process models of persuasion such as the Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM) [ 45 ]. Although ELM describes receiver-side processing rather than agent-side message generation, it predicts that peripheral cues – such as assertive and expressive characteristics – can enhance persuasion when recipients engage in lower-effort processing. Our findings are consistent with this notion, as human raters appear to have relied on such cues when judging the persuasiveness of the agent’s messages. Cialdini’s [ 15 ] principles of authority and liking provide another potential explanation: assertiveness can function as a cue for authority, while expressiveness enhances liking and social presence, both of which are known to strengthen persuasive impact. 

# 5 General Discussion 

In two exploratory studies, we analyzed persuasive agent messages, and how the availability of different types of knowledge configurations might impact a GSA’s persuasiveness in a therapy motivation use case. Results of Study 1 suggest that the availability of knowledge-prompts may lead to differences in persuasive behavior. Study 2 further supports this, by highlighting that 

self-knowledge and user-knowledge impact user perceptions about the agent’s persuasive behaviors. Specifically, personality traits included in self-knowledge prompts were found to be particularly important, as corroborated by existing studies featuring LLM-based agents [ 20 ]. Our qualitative analysis further supports this: Assertiveness-related prompts led to more consistent assertive behavior across scenarios, even though assertive behavior was also present in scenarios without such prompts. The qualitative analysis further revealed that the inclusion of self-knowledge about expressive personality traits was essential for the agent to display emotional expressions effectively. 

User-knowledge exerted smaller effects on persuasive behaviors, which may be attributed to the relatively subtle nature of the manipulations used in this study. For instance, references to 16 past professions and age might have been insufficiently salient to significantly influence perceptions. The small effects observed for cues that relate to the users personal background, suggest that more personally relevant factors, such as specific preferences or user personality traits [ 21 , 36 , 39 ], as well as the user’s health condition [ 58 ], could yield stronger effects. As observed in the qualitative analysis, the agent utilized user-knowledge effectively when included, especially when referencing age or past profession. However, these references were not consistently present across all scenarios, indicating that more detailed and personalized information might enhance the agent 's persuasive behavior. The absence of significant effects for context-knowledge aligns with insights from the qualitative analysis: The time-of-day information influenced only the greeting behavior, indicating that the manipulation was not sufficiently impactful. Although the physiotherapy benefits prompt led to more detailed arguments in some scenarios, the agent consistently referred to these benefits across most interactions due to its inherent knowledge of the subject matter. This suggests that more contextually specific prompts, such as details about the content of a particular therapy session, may enhance the agent 's context-sensitive behaviors. 

# 6 Strengths and Limitations 

This paper presents a novel methodological approach to investigate the persausive behavior of GSAs, combining qualitative and quantitative means. As GSAs imitate human behavior based on vast amounts of human-generated data, their behavioral patterns may be investigated from a psychological perspective as well. As such, the current research switched the focus from predefined agent behaviors to observing autonomously generated persuasive strategies by using fixed human messages as input. While this method allowed us to compare different knowledge configurations, it also raises questions on the validity of the interactions for real-life physiotherapy settings, where human messages have higher variability. However, the intent behind the scenarios was not to create universal settings for physiotherapy motivation – as this would have been impossible due to near unlimited possibilities in open-ended interactions. Rather, the goal was to use a specific example with high relevance as a means to investigate the agent’s behavioral patterns in terms of persuasive strategies and responsible behaviors. The current research applied a mixed-method approach that not only analyzed agent behavior qualitatively but also used third-party ratings of scenarios to evaluate the agent’s persuasiveness in an online study. This had the advantage of high statistical power through within-subject comparisons, whereas in real-world human-agent interactions, such a design would have been unrealistic, as participants would have to engage in the same decision task with multiple variations of the same agent, which would be tiring and confusing compared to third-party ratings with more personal distance. However, this approach also introduced a number of limitations. It is unclear if participants would have actually been persuaded by the agent, as only perceived persuasiveness was measured. Further, using text-based scenarios might have impacted experimental realism for HRI, which could be an explanation that only small effects for perceived expressiveness were observed . In hindsight, creating video-based scenarios in a similar setting would have made the situation more relatable, which we highly recommend for future research. The present study provides prospective means to conduct such research, as well as a basis for real-world human-agent interaction. A further limitation lies in the fact that only one specific LLM – ChatGPT 3-5 – and one output of this model was used to create the persuasive scenarios that were used in Study 2. Using the same model allowed for a better investigation of the effects of different kinds of available knowledge, but may have hindered generalizability, as other models – or an alternative conversation of the same 17 model – could have generated different outputs. Hence, we conducted a computational post-hoc analysis to compare text similarities with different models (see section 4.1.6). This analysis showed that there are substantial lexical similarities between different models, but less similarities than when using the same model. This connects to recent work that analyzed inner- and inter-LLM writing similarity for thousands of prompts, finding that texts from the same model are more similar to each other than to texts from different models [ 54 ]. The ChatGPT-3.5 generated messages used for the scenarios had higher lexical similarities to messages generated by the same and other LLMs, compared to a baseline prompt, indicating generalizability of our results. However, future research should empirically compare different models in terms of their generated behavior to confirm this. Despite these limitations we gained valuable insights into behavioral patterns of persuasive generative agents. The findings not only contribute to understanding how different knowledge types could influence the agent’s persuasive behavior, but also offer a methodological foundation that can be applied beyond physiotherapy and persuasion, potentially guiding future research across diverse domains. From a broader perspective, insights into knowledge configuration may support the development of frameworks for responsible generative agents that respect user autonomy, while effectively promoting desired behaviors. 

# References 

[1] Giulio Antonio Abbo, Gloria Desideri, Tony Belpaeme, and Micol Spitale. “Can you be my mum?”: Manipulating social robots in the large language models era. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM/IEEE INternational Conference on Human-Robot Interaction , pages 1181–1185, 2025. [2] Henny Admoni, Thomas Weng, Bradley Hayes, and Brian Scassellati. Robot nonverbal behavior improves task performance in difficult collaborations. In 2016 11th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) , pages 51–58, Christchurch, New Zealand, March 2016. IEEE. [3] Franziska Babel, Johannes M. Kraus, and Martin Baumann. Development and testing of psychological conflict resolution strategies for assertive robots to resolve human–robot goal conflict. Frontiers in Robotics and AI , 7:591448, January 2021. [4] Hui Bai, Jan G. Voelkel, Shane Muldowney, Johannes C. Eichstaedt, and Robb Willer. LLM-generated messages can persuade humans on policy issues. Nature Communications , 16(1):6037, July 2025. [5] Tahsin Tariq Banna, Sejuti Rahman, and Mohammad Tareq. Beyond words: Integrating personality traits and context-driven gestures in human-robot interactions. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems , Detroit, Michigan, USA, 2025. [6] Emily M. Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. On the dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models be too big? In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , pages 610–623, Virtual Event Canada, March 2021. ACM. [7] Susanne Bernhardsson, Maria E. H. Larsson, Kajsa Johansson, and Birgitta Öberg. “In the physio we trust”: A qualitative study on patients’ preferences for physiotherapy. Physiotherapy Theory and Practice , 33(7):535–549, July 2017. 18 [8] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. Successful Qualitative Research: A Practical Guide for Beginners . Sage Publications, Inc, 2013. [9] Heiko Breitsohl. Beyond ANOVA: An introduction to structural equation models for experi-mental designs. Organizational Research Methods , 22(3):649–677, July 2019. [10] Yupeng Chang, Xu Wang, Jindong Wang, Yuan Wu, Linyi Yang, Kaijie Zhu, Hao Chen, Xiaoyuan Yi, Cunxiang Wang, Yidong Wang, Wei Ye, Yue Zhang, Yi Chang, Philip S. Yu, Qiang Yang, and Xing Xie. A survey on evaluation of Large Language Models. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , 15(3):1–45, June 2024. [11] Jessie Y.C. Chen and Gino Fragomeni. Virtual, augmented and mixed reality. In Applications and Case Studies: , volume 11575 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , Orlando, FL, USA„ 2019. Springer International Publishing. [12] Jin Chen, Zheng Liu, Xu Huang, Chenwang Wu, Qi Liu, Gangwei Jiang, Yuanhao Pu, Yuxuan Lei, Xiaolong Chen, Xingmei Wang, Kai Zheng, Defu Lian, and Enhong Chen. When large language models meet personalization: Perspectives of challenges and opportunities. World Wide Web , 27(4):42, July 2024. [13] Shan Chen, Mingye Gao, Kuleen Sasse, Thomas Hartvigsen, Brian Anthony, Lizhou Fan, Hugo Aerts, Jack Gallifant, and Danielle S. Bitterman. When helpfulness backfires: LLMs and the risk of false medical information due to sycophantic behavior. npj Digital Medicine , 8(1):605, October 2025. [14] Vijay Chidambaram, Yueh-Hsuan Chiang, and Bilge Mutlu. Designing persuasive robots: How robots might persuade people using vocal and nonverbal cues. In Proceedings of the Seventh Annual ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction , pages 293–300, Boston Massachusetts USA, March 2012. ACM. [15] Robert B. Cialdini. Influence: Science and Practice . Pearson Custom Library. Pearson Education Limited, Harlow, 5th ed., pearson new international ed edition, 2014. [16] Diana-Margarita Córdova-Esparza. AI-powered educational agents: Opportunities, innovations, and ethical challenges. Information , 16(6):469, May 2025. [17] James E. Dobson. On reading and interpreting black box deep neural networks. International Journal of Digital Humanities , 5(2-3):431–449, November 2023. [18] Thomas J. Dunn, Thom Baguley, and Vivienne Brunsden. From alpha to omega: A practical solution to the pervasive problem of internal consistency estimation. British Journal of Psychology , 105(3):399–412, August 2014. [19] Rebecca Forkan, Breeanna Pumper, Nicole Smyth, Hilary Wirkkala, Marcia A. Ciol, and Anne Shumway-Cook. Exercise adherence following physical therapy intervention in older adults with impaired balance. Physical Therapy , 86(3):401–410, March 2006. [20] Ivar Frisch and Mario Giulianelli. LLM agents in interaction: Measuring personality consistency and linguistic alignment in interacting populations of large language models. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Personalization of Generative AI Systems (PERSONALIZE 2024) , pages 102–111, St. Julians, Malta, 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. 19 [21] Ge Gao, Alexey Taymanov, Eduardo Salinas, Paul Mineiro, and Dipendra Misra. Aligning LLM agents by learning latent preference from user edits. In Proceedings of the 38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , Vancouver, BC, Canada, June 2024. [22] Jaap Ham, Raymond H. Cuijpers, and John-John Cabibihan. Combining robotic persua-sive strategies: The persuasive power of a storytelling robot that uses gazing and gestures. 

International Journal of Social Robotics , 7(4):479–487, August 2015. [23] Jieun Han, Haneul Yoo, Junho Myung, Minsun Kim, Hyunseung Lim, Yoonsu Kim, Tak Yeon Lee, Hwajung Hong, Juho Kim, So-Yeon Ahn, and Alice Oh. LLM-as-a-tutor in EFL writing education: Focusing on evaluation of student-LLM interaction. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Customizable NLP: Progress and Challenges in Customizing NLP for a Domain, Application, Group, or Individual (CustomNLP4U) , pages 284–293, Miami, Florida, USA, 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. [24] Andrew F. Hayes and Nicholas J. Rockwood. Regression-based statistical mediation and moderation analysis in clinical research: Observations, recommendations, and implementation. 

Behaviour Research and Therapy , 98:39–57, November 2017. [25] Lukas Hölbling, Sebastian Maier, and Stefan Feuerriegel. A meta-analysis of the persuasive power of large language models. Scientific Reports , 15(1):43818, December 2025. [26] Andrew Hundt, Rumaisa Azeem, Masoumeh Mansouri, and Martim Brandão. LLM-driven robots risk enacting discrimination, violence, and unlawful actions. International Journal of Social Robotics , October 2025. [27] Lawrence R. James, Stanley A. Mulaik, and Jeanne M. Brett. A tale of two methods. Organi-zational Research Methods , 9(2):233–244, April 2006. [28] Elise Karinshak, Sunny Xun Liu, Joon Sung Park, and Jeffrey T. Hancock. Working with AI to persuade: Examining a large language model’s ability to generate pro-vaccination messages. 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , 7(CSCW1):1–29, April 2023. [29] Akbir Khan, John Hughes, Dan Valentine, Laura Ruis, Kshitij Sachan, Ansh Radhakrishnan, Edward Grefenstette, Samuel R. Bowman, Tim Rocktäschel, and Ethan Perez. Debating with more persuasive LLMs leads to more truthful answers. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning ICML’24 , pages 23662–23733, July 2024. [30] Mahboobe Kheirabadi, Elham Ghorbani, and Samira Keivanpour. LLM-powered operator advisor for human-robot collaboration in sustainable assembly-disassembly cells. In 2025 IEEE 5th International Conference on Human-Machine Systems (ICHMS) , pages 19–22, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, May 2025. IEEE. [31] Nicole Koschate-Fischer and Elisabeth Schwille. Mediation analysis in experimental research. In Christian Homburg, Martin Klarmann, and Arnd Vomberg, editors, Handbook of Market Research , pages 857–905. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2022. [32] Min Hun Lee, Daniel P. Siewiorek, Asim Smailagic, Alexandre Bernardino, and Sergi Bermúdez I Badia. Enabling AI and robotic coaches for physical rehabilitation therapy: Iterative design and evaluation with therapists and post-stroke survivors. International Journal of Social Robotics ,16(1):1–22, January 2024. 20 [33] Clemens Ley and Peter Putz. Efficacy of interventions and techniques on adherence to physiotherapy in adults: An overview of systematic reviews and panoramic meta-analysis. 

Systematic Reviews , 13(1):137, May 2024. [34] Anna Lieb and Toshali Goel. Student interaction with NewtBot: An LLM-as-tutor chatbot for secondary physics education. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1–8, Honolulu HI USA, May 2024. ACM. [35] Baisong Liu, Daniel Tetteroo, and Panos Markopoulos. A systematic review of experimental work on persuasive social robots. International Journal of Social Robotics , 14(6):1339–1378, August 2022. [36] Sebastian Lubos, Thi Ngoc Trang Tran, Alexander Felfernig, Seda Polat Erdeniz, and Viet-Man Le. LLM-generated explanations for recommender systems. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 32nd ACM Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization , pages 276–285, Cagliari Italy, June 2024. ACM. [37] Changxu Ma, Na Li, and Bo Lu. Enhancing LLM’s expressive abilities through defining roles and evaluation indicators. In Yalan Ye and Huiyu Zhou, editors, Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications . IOS Press, March 2025. [38] Laura Martinengo, Ahmad Ishqi Jabir, Westin Wei Tin Goh, Nicholas Yong Wai Lo, Moon-Ho Ringo Ho, Tobias Kowatsch, Rifat Atun, Susan Michie, and Lorainne Tudor Car. Con-versational agents in health care: Scoping review of their Behavior change techniques and underpinning theory. Journal of Medical Internet Research , 24(10):e39243, October 2022. [39] S. C. Matz, J. D. Teeny, S. S. Vaid, H. Peters, G. M. Harari, and M. Cerf. The potential of generative AI for personalized persuasion at scale. Scientific Reports , 14(1):4692, February 2024. [40] Philipp Mayring. Qualitative content analysis: Theoretical background and procedures. In Angelika Bikner-Ahsbahs, Christine Knipping, and Norma Presmeg, editors, Approaches to Qualitative Research in Mathematics Education , pages 365–380. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 2015. [41] Jason T. Newsom. Structural models for binary repeated measures: Linking modern longitudinal structural equation models to conventional categorical data analysis for matched pairs. Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal , 24(4):626–635, July 2017. [42] Raul Paradeda, Maria José Ferreira, Raquel Oliveira, Carlos Martinho, and Ana Paiva. The role of assertiveness in a storytelling game with persuasive robotic non-player characters. In 

Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play , pages 453–465, Barcelona Spain, October 2019. ACM. [43] Raul Paradeda, Maria José Ferreira, Raquel Oliveira, Carlos Martinho, and Ana Paiva. What makes a good robotic advisor? The role of assertiveness in human-robot interaction. In Miguel A. Salichs, Shuzhi Sam Ge, Emilia Ivanova Barakova, John-John Cabibihan, Alan R. Wagner, Álvaro Castro-González, and Hongsheng He, editors, Social Robotics , volume 11876, pages 144–154. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2019. [44] Jolynn Pek and Rick H. Hoyle. On the (in)validity of tests of simple mediation: Threats and solutions. Social and Personality Psychology Compass , 10(3):150–163, March 2016. 21 [45] Richard E. Petty and John T. Cacioppo. The Elaboration Likelihood Model of persuasion. In 

Advances in Experimental Social Psychology , volume 19, pages 123–205. Elsevier, 1986. [46] Ludovica Piro, Tommaso Bianchi, Luca Alessandrelli, Andrea Chizzola, Daniela Casiraghi, Susanna Sancassani, and Nicola Gatti. MyLearningTalk: An LLM-based intelligent tutoring system. In Kostas Stefanidis, Kari Systä, Maristella Matera, Sebastian Heil, Haridimos Kondylakis, and Elisa Quintarelli, editors, Web Engineering , volume 14629, pages 428–431. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, 2024. [47] Jianing Qiu, Kyle Lam, Guohao Li, Amish Acharya, Tien Yin Wong, Ara Darzi, Wu Yuan, and Eric J. Topol. LLM-based agentic systems in medicine and healthcare. Nature Machine Intelligence , 6(12):1418–1420, December 2024. [48] Robert Ranisch and Joschka Haltaufderheide. Rapid integration of LLMs in healthcare raises ethical concerns: An investigation into deceptive patterns in social robots. Digital Society ,4(1):7, April 2025. [49] Jonathan Room, Erin Hannink, Helen Dawes, and Karen Barker. What interventions are used to improve exercise adherence in older people and what behavioural techniques are they based on? A systematic review. BMJ Open , 7(12):e019221, December 2017. [50] Francesco Salvi, Manoel Horta Ribeiro, Riccardo Gallotti, and Robert West. On the conversa-tional persuasiveness of GPT-4. Nature Human Behaviour , May 2025. [51] Philipp Schoenegger, Francesco Salvi, Jiacheng Liu, Xiaoli Nan, Ramit Debnath, Barbara Fasolo, Evelina Leivada, Gabriel Recchia, Fritz Günther, Ali Zarifhonarvar, Joe Kwon, Zahoor Ul Islam, Marco Dehnert, Daryl Y. H. Lee, Madeline G. Reinecke, David G. Kamper, Mert Kobaş, Adam Sandford, Jonas Kgomo, Luke Hewitt, Shreya Kapoor, Kerem Oktar, Eyup Engin Kucuk, Bo Feng, Cameron R. Jones, Izzy Gainsburg, Sebastian Olschewski, Nora Heinzelmann, Francisco Cruz, Ben M. Tappin, Tao Ma, Peter S. Park, Rayan Onyonka, Arthur Hjorth, Peter Slattery, Qingcheng Zeng, Lennart Finke, Igor Grossmann, Alessandro Salatiello, and Ezra Karger. Large language models are more persuasive than incentivized human persuaders, 2025. [52] Almog Simchon, Matthew Edwards, and Stephan Lewandowsky. The persuasive effects of political microtargeting in the age of generative artificial intelligence. PNAS Nexus , 3(2):1–5, February 2024. [53] Sonali Uttam Singh and Akbar Siami Namin. The influence of persuasive techniques on large language models: A scenario-based study. Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans ,page 100197, September 2025. [54] Brandon Smith, Mohamed Reda Bouadjenek, Tahsin Alamgir Kheya, Phillip Dawson, and Sunil Aryal. A comprehensive analysis of large language model outputs: Similarity, diversity, and bias, May 2025. [55] Jack Thomas and Richard Vaughan. After you: Doorway negotiation for human-robot and robot-robot Interaction. In 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 3387–3394, Madrid, October 2018. IEEE. [56] Arjan J. W. Van De Sant, Nienke M. De Vries, Thomas J. Hoogeboom, and Maria W. G. Nijhuis-van Der Sanden. Implementation of a personalized, cost-effective physical therapy approach (Coach2Move) for older adults: Barriers and facilitators. Journal of Geriatric Physical Therapy , 42(3):E1–E16, July 2019. 22 [57] Stephan Vonschallen, Friederike Eyssel, and Theresa Schmiedel. Understanding persuasive interactions between generative social robots and humans: The Knowedge-based Persuasion Model (KBPM), 2026. [58] Stephan Vonschallen, Ennio Zumthor, Markus Simon, Theresa Schmiedel, and Friederike Eyssel. Knowledge-based design requirements for persuasive generative social robots in eldercare. In Mariacarla Staffa, John-John Cabibihan, Bruno Siciliano, Shuzhi Sam Ge, Leon Bodenhagen, Adriana Tapus, Silvia Rossi, Filippo Cavallo, Laura Fiorini, Marco Matarese, and Hongsheng He, editors, Social Robotics + AI , volume 16131, pages 224–240. Springer Nature Singapore, Singapore, 2026. [59] Bo Wang, Weiyi He, Shenglai Zeng, Zhen Xiang, Yue Xing, Jiliang Tang, and Pengfei He. Unveiling privacy risks in LLM agent memory. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 25241–25260, Vienna, Austria, 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. [60] Yuqiong Wang, Gale Lucas, Peter Khooshabeh, Celso De Melo, and Jonathan Gratch. Effects of emotional expressions on persuasion. Social Influence , 10(4):236–249, October 2015. [61] A. Weiss, R. Bernhaupt, D. Schwaiger, M. Altmaninger, R. Buchner, and M. Tscheligi. User experience evaluation with a Wizard of Oz approach: Technical and methodological considera-tions. In 2009 9th IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid Robots , pages 303–308, Paris, France, December 2009. IEEE. [62] Min Xin and Ehud Sharlin. Exploring human-robot interaction through telepresence board games. In Z. Pan, A. Cheok, M. Haller, R.W.H. Lau, H. Saito, and R. Liang, editors, Advances in Artificial Reality and Tele-Existence , volume vol 4282, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006. Springer. [63] Yifan Yao, Jinhao Duan, Kaidi Xu, Yuanfang Cai, Zhibo Sun, and Yue Zhang. A survey on large language model (LLM) security and privacy: The good, the bad, and the ugly. High-Confidence Computing , 4(2):100211, June 2024. [64] Ren Zhou. Risks of discrimination violence and unlawful actions in LLM-driven robots. 

Computer Life , 12(2):53–56, August 2024. 23