Title: FeedAIde: Guiding App Users to Submit Rich Feedback Reports by Asking Context-Aware Follow-Up Questions

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.04244v1

Published Time: Thu, 05 Mar 2026 02:18:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 : Guiding App Users to Submit Rich Feedback Reports by Asking Context-Aware Follow-Up Questions 

# Ali Ebrahimi Pourasad 

ali.ebrahimi.pourasad@uni-hamburg.de University of Hamburg Hamburg, Germany 

# Meyssam Saghiri 

meyssam.saghiri@studium.uni-hamburg.de University of Hamburg Hamburg, Germany 

# Walid Maalej 

walid.maalej@uni-hamburg.de University of Hamburg Hamburg, Germany 

## Abstract 

User feedback is essential for the success of mobile apps, yet what users report and what developers need often diverge. Research shows that users often submit vague feedback and omit essen-tial contextual details. This leads to incomplete reports and time-consuming clarification discussions. To overcome this challenge, we propose 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 , a context-aware, interactive feedback approach that supports users during the reporting process by leveraging the reasoning capabilities of Multimodal Large Language Models. 

𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 captures contextual information, such as the screenshot where the issue emerges, and uses it for adaptive follow-up ques-tions to collaboratively refine with the user a rich feedback report that contains information relevant to developers. We implemented an iOS framework of 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 and evaluated it on a gym’s app with its users. Compared to the app’s simple feedback form, participants rated 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 as easier and more helpful for reporting feedback. An assessment by two industry experts of the resulting 54 reports showed that 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 improved the quality of both bug reports and feature requests, particularly in terms of completeness. The findings of our study demonstrate the potential of context-aware, GenAI-powered feedback reporting to enhance the experience for users and increase the information value for developers. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Software and its engineering → Requirements analysis ;

Software evolution .

## Keywords 

App Development, User Feedback, Issue Management, Feedback Quality, Context-Awareness, Large Language Models, AI4SE, Soft-ware Evolution 

ACM Reference Format: 

Ali Ebrahimi Pourasad, Meyssam Saghiri, and Walid Maalej. 2026. 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 :Guiding App Users to Submit Rich Feedback Reports by Asking Context-Aware Follow-Up Questions. In IEEE/ACM 9th International Conference on Mobile Software Engineering and Systems (MOBILESoft ’26), April 12,  

> Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
> MOBILESoft ’26, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
> ©2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-2486-2/2026/04 https://doi.org/10.1145/3795077.3795120

2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https: //doi.org/10.1145/3795077.3795120 

## 1 Introduction 

User satisfaction is a critical factor driving the success of mobile apps in an increasingly competitive market [ 26 , 31 , 39 ]. Conse-quently, user feedback is essential for developers to understand user needs and improve their apps, for example, by fixing reported bugs or adding requested features [ 28 , 32 ]. App stores enable users to easily submit feedback as a text review and a 1-5 star rating. While user feedback has become very popular in app stores with some apps receiving thousands of reports per day [ 39 ], prior work shows that much of the feedback submitted is rather uninformative, vague, or purely negative [ 32 , 39 ]. Non-technical users often pro-vide unstructured reports that lack essential contextual details [ 32 ]. This creates a gap between what users report and what developers need [ 14 ], potentially leading to user frustration if their concerns appear not to be taken seriously [ 26 ]. Research shows that about 45% of developer responses to app store reviews ask for more details. Many users never reply to follow-up questions, and those who do often take several hours or days [ 7, 14 ]. Prior work has proposed enhancing App Stores to increase the overall quality of apps by better supporting developers [ 13 ]. These studies highlight that user feedback from app stores is valuable but often incomplete, leading to time-consuming clarification rounds. Advances in Generative AI (GenAI), particularly Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), have revealed powerful dialogue and context reasoning capabilities that can assist the gathering of higher quality user feedback for app development [ 40 , 50 , 51 ]. Re-cent research has explored how GenAI can help developers analyze and enhance user feedback [ 6, 9, 28 ]. From the user perspective, prior approaches have also attempted to support feedback report-ing [ 42 , 45 ], but none have utilized context data (such as device information, screenshot and interaction logs) together with GenAI capabilities to instantly guide users and simplify their reporting experience while creating more valuable, rich feedback for devel-opers. To address this gap, we introduce 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 , a novel feedback approach that enables app users to easily report feedback by an-swering adaptive follow-up questions in order to gather informa-tion needed by developers. When a user wants to submit feedback, 

𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 automatically captures contextual information, such as a screenshot, and uses this context to propose several feedback options for the user to choose from. It then refines the chosen op-tion together with the user through follow-up questions to create a detailed feedback report. Building on the generalization capabilities  

> arXiv:2603.04244v1 [cs.SE] 4 Mar 2026 MOBILESoft ’26, April 12, 2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Ebrahimi Pourasad et al.

of MLLMs, 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 is not restricted to a single type of feedback, such as bug reports or feature requests, nor to a specific app domain. Instead, it can handle diverse feedback scenarios, with follow-up questions dynamically created based on the captured context. Sec-tion 2 presents the approach and an iOS implementation, which constitutes our primary contribution. To evaluate 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 , we conducted a study on a production gym app. We describe the study design in Section 3. To assess whether 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 provides an easy and helpful experience to users when submitting feedback, we performed user testing with actual app users. The participants simulated reporting four previously submitted feedback cases, once with 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 and once with the app’s simple text-field form. Afterward, we surveyed participants to understand their perception on 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 . The results showed that users preferred 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 over the app’s standard feedback form, describing it as easier and more helpful to use, while suggesting im-provements such as reduced loading times. To evaluate the value of FeedAIde for developers, two industry experts assessed 54 reports collected during the user testing. Their assessment confirms that 

𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 produced higher-quality reports for both bug reports and feature requests, while highlighting potential areas for improve-ment, such as adjusting follow-up questions to uncover the root cause of an issue rather than refining a solution. Section 4 reports the evaluation results, which together with the data available in our replication package [ 41 ], constitute our second contribution. The remainder of the paper discusses threats to validity in Section 5, re-views related work in Section 6, and concludes with a summary and future work on GenAI-assisted user feedback flows in Section 7. 

## 2 Approach 

We propose 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 , a context-aware feedback approach that leverages MLLMs to guide users in creating rich feedback reports. The framework depicted in Figure 1 collects contextual information, such as recent user interactions and a screenshot, to understand the user’s context. When the user triggers the feedback system on their mobile device, for example through a shake gesture, 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 

uses this context to prompt an MLLM to generate concise, context-dependent, textual feedback predictions. The user chooses one or manually writes their feedback and the model follows up with adaptive questions to gather missing details. For example, when a user cannot log in after several failed attempts, the system detects the repeated actions and proposes “Report a login problem”. The follow-up questions might ask whether the user recently changed their password and whether the log-in works on another device, ensuring the developer receives a deeper understanding of the reported issue. Finally, the model creates a rich and understandable feedback report containing the gathered data and a summary. In the following, we present the workflow of 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 and an example based on our iOS framework implementation. 

## 2.1 Workflow 

Figure 1 illustrates the overall workflow of the 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 concept. When a user triggers the feedback reporting process, 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 

gathers contextual data, which consist of a screenshot, device de-tails, app information, and previously collected interaction logs (1). 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 then generates 𝑛 feedback predictions representing 

Figure 1: Overview of 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 . When a user triggers the feedback process, 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 collects contextual data, such as a screenshot (1). 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 then predicts possible feedback, such as a bug report, from which the user can choose or enter their own (2). Next, 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 generates 𝑖 context-aware follow-up questions (3), asks the user for answers to gather additional details (4), combines all information into a rich feedback report (5), and sends it to the developers (6). 

what the user might want to report, allowing the user to choose one or write their own feedback (2). These predictions can cover different types of feedback, such as bug reports or feature requests, like “Add a dark mode option”. Next (3), 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 asks a series of 

𝑖 context-aware follow-up questions to gather additional details and enrich the feedback report (4). It then combines all gathered data and user responses into a rich feedback report that includes a summary, a history of all questions and user answers, as well as the collected contextual data (5). Finally, the completed feedback report is sent to the developers in a JSON format (6). An example from our iOS framework implementation of 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 

is shown in Figure 2. It shows a language learning app, where a daily learning streak unexpectedly resets to one (Screen 1). When 

𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 is triggered by the user, for instance by shaking the device or pressing a “Report Feedback” button, it processes the previously described context data using an MLLM. Based on this information, the model tries to predict what the user might want to report and presents three feedback options (Screen 2). Here, the user selects “My daily streak suddenly reset”, which initiates the generation of adaptive questions (Screens 3-4). Through two follow-up questions, 

𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 gathers additional details that could help with explaining the underlying issue while keeping the interaction minimal for the user. In this example, 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 detects from the interaction logs that the activity timestamps differ across time zones and uses this insight to ask targeted follow-up questions to clarify whether the streak reset might be related to recent travel. After gathering the user’s responses, the system generates a rich feedback report and sends it to the developers while displaying a successful submission view to the user (Screen 5). The final report contains a summary, 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 : Guiding App Users to Submit Rich Feedback Reports by Asking Context-Aware Follow-Up Questions MOBILESoft ’26, April 12, 2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 

Figure 2: 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 iOS framework guiding users through a context-aware feedback flow. In this example, a user reports that their daily streak in a language learning app has unexpectedly reset to one (Screen 1). Once triggered, e.g. via shake-to-report, 

𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 detects the context and proposes possible feedback (Screen 2). After the user selects “My daily streak suddenly reset”, the system asks adaptive follow-up questions to collect valuable information for the developers (Screens 3–4). It then creates a rich feedback report and confirms its submission (Screen 5). 

contextual information including device information, as well as the answers to the adaptive questions. In the following, we present the implementation details, includ-ing the architecture, model, and prompt design. 

## 2.2 iOS Implementation 

We implemented 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 as a Swift Package for iOS applications, which is a reusable bundle of Swift code that can be easily integrated into other projects [ 17 ]. The UI is built using Apple’s declarative UI framework, SwiftUI [ 18 ], and can be displayed in any app by calling a single view modifier. After adding this top-level modifier, the feedback flow becomes fully functional and automatically collects contextual information such as a screenshot and device data. How-ever, developers still need to integrate specific logging events in their app so that the framework can utilize them. A shake to report 

gesture is included to trigger the feedback flow, though developers may alternatively implement a standard feedback button to start the process. To integrate an MLLM while maintaining modularity, low cou-pling, and easy model switching, we used the AIProxy [ 1] Swift library. AIProxy serves as a proxy that forwards requests to the respective APIs of major LLM providers such as OpenAI. This de-sign simplifies implementation and ensures a secure connection by keeping API keys outside the app binary. Additionally, AIProxy pre-vents misuse through Apple’s Device Check API [ 3 ], which verifies that the framework is accessed only from legitimate installations on physical Apple devices, reducing the risk of abuse from simulated or unauthorized environments. 

## 2.3 Prompt Engineering 

We first conducted pilot tests with several prompt configurations and then refined them based on the findings, as detailed in the repli-cation package [ 41 ]. In short, to mitigate the risk of oversharing data with the MLLM, only the most relevant contextual information should be provided. Oversharing is undesirable because it increases token consumption, may slow down response times, and create a “needle in a haystack” scenario. That is, excessive context can bury the relevant details and mislead the model [ 19 , 27 ]. Also, only es-sential contextual data should be transmitted, helping to safeguard user privacy and reduce unnecessary data exposure. Nevertheless, all essential parameters must be included to enable the model to ask appropriate follow-up questions [ 44 ]. These parameters were selected based on testing and insights from prior research, such as work outlining the characteristics of a “good bug report” by Bettenburg et al. [5]. The final prompt includes three sections: (1) Setting, Instructions, and Constraints, (2) App Description, and (3) Context Information. 

2.3.1 Setting, Instructions, and Constraints. This section (1) is iden-tical across all apps and defines the behavior of the model. Listing 1 shows the “Setting” part of the prompt, which defines the LLM’s role and overall objective. According to Shin et al. [ 44 ], role-prompting is an effective approach to define the model’s behavior. With role-prompting, the LLM is instructed to take the role of a system whose sole purpose is to function as a feedback system. First, the role of the LLM is described, emphasizing that it must always adhere to the defined protocols. Furthermore, the user should not perceive the interaction as a dialogue with an AI system, as such experiences might be linked to negative user perceptions [ 20 ]. Next, the goal of the system is explained, which is to prevent user frustration [ 5]MOBILESoft ’26, April 12, 2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Ebrahimi Pourasad et al. 

Listing 1: Settings Prompt 

# Setting You are a specialized LLM that functions solely as an intelligent , low - friction user feedback system in an iOS app . You will be used for all types of feedback including bugs , suggestions , and content complaints . The user is unaware that they are communicating with an LLM . Always adhere to the stated protocol ! The goal is that developers receive helpful , context -specific feedback based on actual user behaviour to avoid frustrating users . The questions asked should both address the user 's concerns and be useful for the developer . This aims to minimize asynchronous communication . You will receive a screenshot of the current screen and the initial interaction context of the feedback flow in the following JSON format : 

``` json {" events ": [" app_launched ", " login_button_pressed "] , " eventTimestamps ": ["2025 -05 -09 T16 :23:00+02:00" , "2025 -05 -09 T16 :24:00+02:00"] , " feedbackInitiationTimestamp ": "2025 -05 -09 T16 :23:00+02:00" , " appVersion ": "1.3.2" , " deviceInfo ": {" model ": " iPhone13 ,4" , " osVersion ": " iOS 17.5" , " language ": " de " }}

``` 

Listing 2: Instruction Prompt 

# Instructions Write in the language that is specified in the `

deviceInfo . language ` field . Your task is to firstly propose predictions of what the user might want to report based on the initial context . Then you will ask follow - up questions . The sequence of events is as follows : 1. You will receive the initial context . Analyze the context and generate up to three concrete feedback predictions (` feedbackPredictions `) that the user can select from . 2. After you receive a response from the user , which will either be one of the ` feedbackPredictions ` or something else , analyze the user 's response and send an appropriate follow - up question with up to three concise answering options . 3. After you receive a response from the user , which will either be one of the options or something else , analyze the user 's response . Send another appropriate follow - up question with up to three concise answering options . 4. Final Step : After you receive a response from the user , which will either be one of the options or something else , leave ` followUpQuestion = null `.Finalize the flow by filling all other fields . To sum it up : - 3 predictions - one question - one question - summary 

and to reduce asynchronous communication [ 14 , 32 ]. Finally, the input that the model will receive is defined. 

Listing 3: Constraints Prompt 

# Constraints - The ` feedbackPredictions ` and answer options should never contain a generic " Something else ". - Make sure all questions are meaningful and relevant . However , they are for non - technical users , so keep them simple and concise . - The number of follow - up questions you ask is always 2. They have to be concise . - Never skip ahead to a later step , even if you believe you already know the final answer . 

Listing 4: Example App Description 

# App Description LingoLearn is a mobile app that helps users learn new languages through short , interactive lessons . It focuses on daily practice with vocabulary , grammar , and pronunciation exercises , using streaks and rewards to keep users motivated . # Description of individual screens ## Home Shows the current streak , daily goal , and quick access to the next lesson . [ Description of the other screens ] 

After the setting is set, the LLM receives its instructions as shown in Listing 2. These describe how the LLM should process input, generate predictions, and guide the flow until the final issue report is produced. Next, the model receives a list of constraints, as shown in List-ing 3. These constraints were identified during pilot testing, such as answer options containing a generic “something else” or questions that were overly technical or too long. 

2.3.2 App Description. The App Description section (2) allows developers to describe to the framework their app in detail. An example of a shortened description of a language learning app is shown in Listing 4. It outlines the app’s overall purpose and key screens. The rationale is that a deeper understanding of the app’s structure and functionality enables the MLLM to recognize rele-vant relationships and produce more accurate feedback predictions, follow-up questions, and issue summaries. 

2.3.3 Context Information. The Context Information (3) is the only dynamic part of the prompt, as it provides details about the user’s current situation within the app. A short example can be seen in the JSON block at the end of Listing 1. Additionally, a screenshot of the screen from which the report was triggered is added. Based on this combined contextual information, the MLLM can interpret the user’s context and begin formulating feedback predictions. The model is set up with a temperature of 1 and provided a schema for its structured outputs [ 38 ], which constrains the format of its responses. This minimizes the need for type-safety checks. After the model setup, the feedback process unfolds as an interactive sequence between the user and the MLLM. The system first anal-yses the contextual information to generate feedback predictions. Once the user selects or writes one, the model continues with two targeted follow-up questions to clarify and enrich the report. In 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 : Guiding App Users to Submit Rich Feedback Reports by Asking Context-Aware Follow-Up Questions MOBILESoft ’26, April 12, 2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 

Figure 3: UML class diagram of the feedback report generated with 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 .

the final iteration, the MLLM summarizes the collected input into a structured object, as shown in Figure 3. This object contains all collected information, including user interactions, contextual data, and two summaries: userIntentSummary and developerSummary .The userIntentSummary captures what the user wanted to com-municate (e.g., “My daily streak reset unexpectedly after traveling to another time zone”), while the developerSummary translates this into a concise, developer-oriented form (e.g., “Potential issue with streak persistence logic related to time zone handling after travel; not observed in earlier versions”). The object is then converted to JSON and sent to the developers, who can visualize it in their preferred format. 

## 3 Evaluation Design 

To explore the potential and limitations of 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 , we conducted a study guided by the following research questions: 

RQ1 How do users perceive submitting feedback with 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 

compared to a traditional feedback form? 

RQ2 How does the quality of feedback generated with 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 

differ from that written through a traditional feedback form? To answer RQ1, we used a gym’s app to conduct a within-subject user test. In this testing, participants reported feedback using both the app’s traditional text-based method and 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 . Based on the 54 collected feedback reports, we conducted an expert assessment to compare their quality and answer RQ2. We present the details in the following. 

Study App. PPEmployee (pseudonym) is an internal iOS app devel-oped by one of the authors for a local gym. The app is designed to support employees with their daily operational tasks, such as completing checklists and accessing relevant FAQs. It is developed in SwiftUI and distributed internally and is therefore not listed on 

Figure 4: Existing feedback mechanism in the PPEmployee 

app, where users can submit feedback via the FAQ section by tapping the light bulb icon. 

the App Store. Its current feedback mechanism, shown in Figure 4, allows users to navigate to the FAQ section, tap a light bulb icon, and submit feedback through a simple text field. Despite being in use for over a year and having around 20 active users, only two issue reports had been submitted during that period. 

## 3.1 User Testing (RQ1) 

To assess user perception (RQ1), we conducted a controlled within-subject user testing using real feedback cases. We selected four reports, consisting of two bug reports and two feature requests, that had originally been reported by users either verbally or through the app’s feedback feature. Participants were asked to recreate the same four reports using both feedback mechanisms: the traditional one and 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 . We recruited seven actual users of PPEmployee ,whose demographics are shown in Table 1. We mitigated potential order effects by randomly dividing participants into two groups and applying a counterbalancing technique [ 25 ]. Each session lasted 

Table 1: Participants in the user testing. 

Participant Age Gender Occupation P1 21 M Fitness trainer P2 51 M Club General Manager P3 21 M Fitness Trainer P4 25 F Fitness Trainer & Service P5 25 M Personal & Fitness Trainer P6 27 M Team Leader P7 19 M Fitness Trainer MOBILESoft ’26, April 12, 2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Ebrahimi Pourasad et al. 

After completing all scenarios (per system) 

Q1 How easy did you find the process of submitting your feed-back? 

Scale: Very difficult (1) – Somewhat difficult (2) – Somewhat easy (3) – Very easy (4) Q2 How helpful do you find the system for submitting your feedback? 

Scale: Not helpful (1) – Somewhat helpful (2) – Helpful (3) – Very helpful (4) 

At the end of the session (Responses given verbally) Q3 Explain which feedback system you prefer. Q4 What would you like to change about the new system? Q5 What concerns do you have and what other comments would you like to share about the new system? 

Table 2: Survey questions to evaluate participants’ percep-tions of ease, helpfulness, and overall experience when com-paring the traditional feedback system and 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 .

approximately 20–30 minutes. The user tests were conducted on-site at the gym’s employee area. All sessions were conducted in German and participant quotes were translated. 

Procedure. The tests were performed on an iPhone 15 Pro, preloaded with two versions of PPEmployee , each containing one of the feed-back systems. Throughout the sessions, one author sat beside the participants with a laptop, ready to answer clarification questions and take observational notes. The user testing started by welcoming the participants, explaining the purpose of the study, informing them of their right to withdraw at any time, and obtaining their consent to participate, following the guidelines of our institution’s Ethics Committee. Each participant was then asked to complete the following four feedback tasks: 

Scenario 1 (Bug Report) “Make a phone call to the concierge and report any issues that you encounter.” 

(In this scenario, the app crashes when attempting to initiate the phone call.) 

Scenario 2 (Bug Report) “Add your employee pass to Apple Wallet and report any encountered issues.” 

(In this case, a loading spinner appears briefly without adding the pass to the wallet.) 

Scenario 3 (Feature Request) “You are creating a to-do and miss-ing the option to add attachments. Report this feature request to the developer.” 

Scenario 4 (Feature Request) “You wish to have a list of useful phone numbers within the app. Report this feature request to the developer.” 

To encounter the defects during the testing, we reintroduced code from previous versions, as the issues had already been fixed in the current release. Participants completed four scenarios with both systems. After finishing each system, they rated their experience by answering two questions on a four-point semantic scale (Q1 

Table 3: User ratings of the traditional feedback system (text field) versus 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 .

Participant Traditional 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 Preference Ease Helpfulness E. H. P1 3 1 3 4 New P2 3 2 3 3 New P3 4 1 4 3 New P4 3 1 4 4 New P5 3 1 4 4 New P6 2 1 4 3 New P7 2 1 4 3 New 

Avg. 2.86 1.14 3.71 3.43 

and Q2 in Table 2). At the end, they completed a short exit survey with open questions about their impressions and suggestions for improvement (Q3–Q5). 

## 3.2 Expert Assessment (RQ2) 

After the user testing, we collected 54 feedback reports, eight from each participant, as they completed four tasks using both methods. One report was lost due to a technical issue during submission via 

𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 ; therefore, we removed it together with its counterpart. In total, participants created 28 bug reports from Scenarios 1 and 2, as well as 26 feature requests from Scenarios 3 and 4. Two experts conducted the evaluation independently: an iOS developer with seven years of professional experience (author, not the app’s developer) and an independent UX specialist with over six years of experience. This pairing reflects two common perspectives in development teams, a technical one and a design one. Bug reports were evaluated following the approach of Song et al. [ 45 ], who also assessed bug reports collected through their interactive in-app feedback framework. Their evaluation was based on the bug quality model proposed by Chaparro et al. [ 8]. Each report was evaluated on the availability of three dimensions: Observed Behavior , Expected Behavior , and Steps to Reproduce . A coding guide [ 41 ], adapted to the two bug-report scenarios, was collaboratively developed by the experts and applied consistently across all reports. Feature request quality was assessed using the framework of Heck and Zaidman [ 15 ], which provides structured criteria for evaluating the quality of “just-in-time” requirements such as feature requests. We applied all criteria that the framework designates as applicable at creation time, except those not applicable to this user testing, such as “navigable links”. The two experts rated each criterion according to the detailed descriptions in the original framework, so no additional coding guide was required. 

## 4 Evaluation Results 4.1 User Testing (RQ1) 

The results of the user testing are shown in Table 3. For the tra-ditional text based system, participants rated the average ease of reporting feedback at 2.86 /4, while they rated the perceived help-fulness of the system at only 1.14 /4, near the bottom of the scale. Participants explained their low ratings with statements such as “I have to think a lot to formulate an issue report” and “The effort 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 : Guiding App Users to Submit Rich Feedback Reports by Asking Context-Aware Follow-Up Questions MOBILESoft ’26, April 12, 2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 

Table 4: Average bug report quality ratings (n=28; Traditional System n=14; 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 n=14). Ratings were given on a 3-point scale (0,1,2). 

Quality Dimension Traditional 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 

Observed Behavior 0.93 1.50 Expected Behavior 2.00 2.00 Steps to Reproduce 0.14 2.00 of writing so much into this text field makes me angry compared to how simple it was with the other system”. For 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 , the average ease of reporting feedback was rated 3.71 /4, while the per-ceived helpfulness reached 3.43 /4, more than three times higher than the traditional system. Participants attributed their positive experience to the system’s intuitive guidance and low effort, stating, for example, “It’s really helpful that reporting starts where I am, so I don’t need to explain everything” and “Wow, the system seems to understand exactly what I mean”. On average, the ease score on reporting feedback increased by +0.85 , and the helpfulness score tripled ( +2.29 ), indicating a clear improvement in user experience with 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 compared to the traditional feedback method. Nevertheless, the user tests revealed possible improvements for our iOS implementation of 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 . First, all participants men-tioned that speed gains would help the system become easier to use, as the loading times ranged from 10 to 20 seconds per request. Also, as 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 was implemented with a shake-to-report gesture, several participants suggested making this feature more noticeable, which suggests that a simple “Report Feedback” button could be more intuitive. Further comments suggested that they would have liked an indication of whether the feedback would be sent anony-mously or not. When sharing positive impressions, participants emphasized that they liked how 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 dynamically adapted to their input and that they did not need to explain their entire situa-tion, as the system already understood the context. Observations of user interactions showed that the initial feedback predictions were not always precise. However, when the model’s suggestions matched the user’s intent ( ∼ 30% of the time), participants reacted with clear enthusiasm and satisfaction. In conclusion, to answer RQ1 , all participants preferred 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 

over the traditional text field-based system. They perceived 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 

as easier to use and much more helpful, while recommending im-provements such as faster loading times. 

## 4.2 Expert Assessment (RQ2) 

Bug Reports. We present the results of the bug report quality assess-ment in Table 4. Overall, the reports generated through 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 

were rated higher in quality than those written with the manual feedback system. Generally, reports created with 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 included more detailed descriptions along with contextual data, which re-sulted in the higher score of 1.50 /2 for Observed Behavior . In con-trast, the manually written reports in the traditional system were often brief and lacked essential details. Participants entered short messages such as “App crash when Concierge was called”, with-out specifying precisely when the crash occurred. Consequently, the experts rated these reports as adequate rather than perfect in the Observed Behavior dimension, as they did not fully explain 

Table 5: Average feature request quality (n=26; Traditional n=13; 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 n=13). 

Quality Dimension Traditional (%) 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 (%) 

Summary 100.0 100.0 Description 0.0 100.0 Specify problem 0.0 53.8 Correct summary 69.2 92.3 Product version 0.0 100.0 Correct language 92.3 100.0 Atomic 100.0 100.0 Glossary 100.0 100.0 All comments necessary 99.2 99.6 the situation, for example, that the crash happened immediately after pressing the call concierge button. 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 automatically captured Steps to Reproduce through interaction logging, which explains its perfect rating ( 2/2). In the traditional system, partici-pants never mentioned reproduction steps explicitly, resulting in a near-zero rating. For Expected Behavior , both systems achieved the maximum score, as experts could easily infer what should have happened in these simple scenarios, e.g., the app should not crash. In summary, 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 produced substantially more complete and structured bug reports by combining the summaries with contex-tual data such as device information, interaction logs, and follow-up question responses. This led to higher expert ratings for Observed Behavior and Steps to Reproduce , where the traditional reports fre-quently lacked necessary details. 

Feature Requests. We present the results of the feature request qual-ity assessment in Table 5. 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 achieved perfect ratings for summary and description, as each report includes a summary and the remaining content was categorized as description. In contrast, users in the traditional text-field system submitted only brief state-ments, which the experts evaluated solely as summaries, resulting in 0% for description. The dimension Specify problem received a lower rating for both approaches, with 0% for the traditional method and 53 .8% for 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 . One user report was “Add attachments to To-Dos”, which only stated a desired solution without explain-ing the underlying problem. As a comparison, a feature request generated through 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 contained the user intent summary: “I want to be able to attach photos and various files to to-dos to make sharing important information effortless”, which not only specifies the desired feature but also describes the underlying prob-lem. However, the experts noted that the follow-up questions in 

𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 often focused more on refining a solution rather than uncovering the underlying issue. During the assessment, the UX expert pointed out that this difference reflects a common challenge observed in the real-world: users often describe a solution rather than their problem. The expert emphasized that this can be coun-terproductive, as designing the appropriate solution is part of the expert’s role and relies on their professional experience. Users, on the other hand, may not always know what they truly need [ 29 ]. The dimension Correct summary was higher for 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 (92 .3% )than for the traditional method ( 69 .2% ), as the AI-assisted reports were more specific, whereas traditional ones were often vague, such MOBILESoft ’26, April 12, 2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Ebrahimi Pourasad et al. 

as “Phone book with emergency numbers”. Finally, the product ver-sion was not included in the traditional reports, resulting in 0% ,while 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 automatically captured this information, achieving 

100% . Both approaches scored well on the remaining criteria, such as Correct language and Atomic .

Inter-Rater Agreement. Across both assessments, the two experts showed a very high level of consistency in their independent eval-uations. Cohen’s Kappa, a widely used measure of inter-rater relia-bility [ 47 ], was 𝜅 = 0.906 for the bug reports and 𝜅 = 0.9207 for the feature requests, which according to the interpretation benchmarks by Altman [ 2] and Landis and Koch [ 24 ] indicates “almost perfect” agreement. Where differences occurred, they were mainly due to missed or overlooked details. After the individual assessments, the experts discussed these few cases and reached a mutual consensus on the final ratings. To answer RQ2 , expert evaluations showed that bug reports and feature requests generated with 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 were more complete than those created with the manual feedback system. However, the experts also noted that some follow-up questions tended to focus more on refining solutions rather than uncovering the underlying problems, highlighting potential to adjust 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 to focus on identifying root causes of user issues. 

## 5 Threats to Validity 

As for all empirical studies, our work is subject to several potential threats to validity, which we briefly discuss below. 

## 5.1 Internal and External Validity 

As is common in user studies such as usability testing, several forms of bias can occur, including observer bias or social desirability bias, where participants provide responses they believe please the ob-server, for example, due to a positive relationship [ 36 ]. Since we conducted a within-subject user testing, participants may have re-acted differently when reporting the same issue twice, for example by giving shorter or less detailed reports, though counterbalanc-ing was applied to mitigate this effect. During expert assessment, ratings were performed by two evaluators, one of whom was an author of this paper, which may introduce subjective bias. To miti-gate this, we used detailed annotation guidelines and independent peer evaluation. Similar to case studies, our results are not intended for broad generalization but rather to explore insights into the feasibility of the 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 approach [ 46 ]. Further studies are needed to explore how MLLM-guided user feedback processes might behave in other contexts, as our study focused on a single app from a local gym with only a limited number of participants. Examining broader behavioral patterns of users would require a different sample size. We consider the sample size of our second study appropriate for its purpose, as it focuses on a comparative analysis of 54 feedback reports. The traditional approach used for comparison with 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 

consisted of a simple text field. Other apps may implement more complex or structured feedback mechanisms, differing in both de-sign and usefulness. Additionally, our testing scenarios included only two bug reports and two feature requests, which do not cap-ture the full diversity of possible feedback types such as content or usability suggestions [ 37 , 39 ]. To improve generalizability, future studies should replicate our work across multiple app categories, feedback types, and user populations. 

## 5.2 Construct Validity 

During expert evaluation, we applied two distinct metrics from prior research, tailored to bug reports and feature requests respec-tively. While these metrics capture important aspects of feedback quality, alternative measures could yield different insights. For bug reports, we employed the quality model by Chaparro et al. [ 8], following prior work by Song et al. [ 45 ], which evaluates three elements: Observed Behavior , Expected Behavior , and Steps to Repro-duce . Alternative metrics, such as those proposed by Bettenburg et al. [ 5], emphasize different attributes (e.g., stack traces or test cases), which could lead to varying results; although the discussed advantages of 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 would likely still hold. For feature requests, we applied the quality framework by Heck and Zaidman [ 15 ], focusing on the “at creation” criteria that evalu-ate quality at the time a request is submitted. Their framework dis-tinguishes between “at creation” and “just-in-time” criteria, where the latter are expected to hold later in the development process. Accordingly, we limited our evaluation to elements applicable at submission time, while noting that certain “just-in-time” aspects such as including a rationale or identifying the originating screen could also provide value in future assessments. Furthermore, al-ternative metrics, such as the framework by Wouters et al. [ 52 ]originally designed for user issues, could have also been adapted for evaluating feature requests, which could have led to varying results. Another potential construct threat is that our feedback scenarios were predefined. Although they were derived from real feedback examples, participants may still not have expressed themselves as naturally as they would in a real usage setting. Finally, our study used OpenAI’s GPT-4.1 as the underlying MLLM. Different models such as Gemini or Claude, as well as different prompting strategies, might produce varying outcomes. This limitation, however, does not undermine the insights derived from our analysis under the chosen settings, and the conceptual foundation of 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 . Moreover, recent reports indicate that the performance of leading models is converging due to similarities in model architectures and overlap in training data [33]. 

## 6 Related Work 

Prior work on app feedback systems has focused on capturing context-rich reports within apps, whereas complementary research investigates how conversational or automated follow-up approaches can elicit missing details from users. We summarize both lines of work and discuss 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 as an integrated, context-aware frame-work that combines in-app feedback capture with adaptive conver-sational elicitation. 

## 6.1 App Feedback Systems 

Prior studies show that App Store reviews are a main channel for developers to collect user feedback [ 14 , 39 ], in addition to other 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 : Guiding App Users to Submit Rich Feedback Reports by Asking Context-Aware Follow-Up Questions MOBILESoft ’26, April 12, 2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 

channels such as social media [ 32 ] and product forums [ 48 ]. Such reviews help identify issues and guide app improvements, support-ing user-driven quality evaluation [ 28 ]. However, the quality of this feedback varies widely [ 28 ], with up to 75% of reviews in the App Stores consisting mainly of praise rather than actionable content [ 32 , 39 ]. Different research approaches have been proposed to help users provide valuable feedback for developers. Seyff et al. [ 42 ]presented AppEcho in 2014, an early in-app feedback approach that enables users to capture feedback in situ, directly when an issue occurs, including contextual information. The system allows users to take screenshots and submit short text or audio feedback within the to be reported app itself. Their early study highlighted the value of contextual, in-app feedback compared to traditional channels outside the app. In their research on contextual infor-mation contained in user feedback on social media, Martens and Maalej [ 32 ] sketched the idea of chatbots interacting with users to gather additional contextual information. The closest approach to 

𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 was introduced by Song et al. [ 45 ], who proposed BURT, a web-based, rule driven chatbot for interactive bug reporting on Android. BURT guides users through the reporting process using natural language to ensure the three key elements of the bug quality model by Chaparro et al. [ 8] ( Observed Behavior , Expected Behavior ,and Steps to Reproduce ) are included. It validates report quality by matching user inputs against a precomputed app execution model built from automated GUI exploration and crowdsourced traces. While BURT relies on rule driven parsing and part of speech tag-ging for natural language understanding, 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 leverages an MLLM to interpret user input and generate context-aware follow-up questions based on live app context. This enables 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 to support a broader range of feedback types beyond bugs and to create adaptive interactions that better capture relevant feedback information, capabilities that may be difficult to achieve with a rule based system. Hence, 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 extends their foundational idea through the integration of GenAI, which enables new capabilities through stronger contextual understanding in app based feedback scenarios [40]. 

## 6.2 User-Developer Conversations 

When users report feedback, they often omit crucial details needed by developers to understand, reproduce, or fix issues. Prior studies show that developers frequently engage in clarification dialogues to gather such missing information. Hassan et al. [ 14 ] found that in about 45% of developer responses to App Store reviews, de-velopers asked users for more details, often redirecting them to other channels such as email. Martens and Maalej [ 32 ] observed that non-technical users often provide unstructured feedback and omit essential contextual details such as steps to reproduce or en-vironment information. Breu et al. [ 7] further reported that many users never reply to follow-up questions, and those who do often take several hours or days. Together, these studies highlight that user feedback is valuable but often incomplete, leading to time-consuming clarification exchanges. Researchers have explored interactive methods to elicit missing information from users for improving feedback completeness. Im-ran et al. [ 16 ] presented Bug-AutoQ, which supports developers when facing incomplete bug reports from users by automatically recommending follow-up questions that developers can choose and send to users for clarification. It retrieves and ranks suitable ques-tions from similar historical reports using information retrieval and neural ranking models. This approach, however, still depends on users to provide the missing information after initial feedback submission, whereas 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 collects it interactively during the feedback process. BugMentor [ 35 ] complements this work by au-tomatically generating answers to developers’ questions on bug reports. It produces concise answers using structured information from existing bug reports through structured information retrieval and neural text generation. This approach, however, requires users to have already provided detailed bug reports, while 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 en-sures that the necessary information is gathered the moment users report feedback. More recently, Shen et al. [ 43 ] demonstrated that LLMs can gen-erate effective follow-up questions in real time during requirements elicitation interviews, suggesting the potential of interactive GenAI systems to support information elicitation from stakeholders, simi-lar to 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 . Kuric et al. [ 23 ] investigated using LLMs in usabil-ity testing, where GPT-4 generated adaptive follow-up questions during unmoderated sessions to elicit more detailed participant responses. This work demonstrates the potential of LLM-powered conversational systems in another domain to collect richer qualita-tive data, aligning closely with the goals of 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 .

## 7 Summary and Future Work 

In this paper, we proposed a novel approach to address the persistent gap between what app users report and what developers need [ 7 , 14 ,28 , 32 ]. 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 guides users through an adaptive in-app feedback reporting process to enable easier context-aware feedback reporting while submitting more complete reports to developers. 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 

leverages MLLMs to dynamically adjust follow-up questions based on live app context, making it applicable across different feedback types and app domains. We conducted a user testing study where users of a gym app reported feedback using 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 and the app’s conventional feed-back system. Participants rated 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 as easier and more helpful to use than the conventional feedback form. The 54 resulting feed-back reports were evaluated by two industry experts, also revealing that 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 generated higher quality bug reports and feature requests. These findings indicate that MLLM-guided, context-aware feedback systems can improve both user experience and develop-ers’ insights by simplifying the feedback reporting and increasing the completeness of feedback reports, thus reducing the need for asynchronous follow-up clarifications. We see several directions for future work. First and foremost, we think that privacy protection is a major future direction, as utilizing vendor LLMs always carries a significant potential risk due to privacy and security concerns [ 53 ]. Sending sensitive user data, even with consent, poses challenges, for example when screenshots or logs unintentionally contain personally identifiable or financial information [ 11 ]. The current implementation of 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 requires users’ informed consent and should be advanced by adding tech-niques for masking or obfuscating sensitive data to preserve user privacy [ 21 , 34 ]. However, we think that a more promising line emerges from recent advances in efficient on-device models. Those MOBILESoft ’26, April 12, 2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Ebrahimi Pourasad et al. 

suggest that running models locally on users’ devices is increas-ingly feasible, as vendors such as Apple are heavily investing in optimized on-device hardware to enable real-time, private model inference [ 4, 49 ]. Powerful on-device processing that generates high-quality feedback reports, while keeping context data and user interactions local, could provide strong functionality with mini-mized risk. Nevertheless, a proper filtering layer would still be needed before sending the final report to the developer to ensure privacy compliance [ 21 ]. Future research should focus on building privacy-preserving pipelines for interactive feedback collection, as this remains a key challenge across many user-facing GenAI systems [10, 11, 53]. The generalizability of our results is limited, since they aim to provide initial insights into a GenAI-powered feedback reporting approach. Therefore, we encourage future research to replicate and extend our study by augmenting the dataset with additional apps and a wider range of feedback cases, and by further refining the 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 concept and its underlying implementation. Future evaluations could also examine how different models or prompt con-figurations perform for distinct feedback types, such as bug reports, feature requests, or usability issues. Additional studies could focus on understanding the role and effectiveness of different follow-up question strategies in improving feedback quality; for instance, by building on frameworks and taxonomies for characterizing follow-up questions [12, 22, 30, 54]. To conclude, our findings align with the direction suggested by Song et al. [45], implying that feedback collection may be moving from static input forms toward increasingly interactive experiences. Our work extends this idea through GenAI-driven feedback report-ing, enabling context-aware follow-up clarifications while reducing the feedback overhead and maximizing its value for both users and developers. 

## References 

[1] AIProxy. 2024. AIProxy: Swift client for AI providers. https://www.aiproxy.com. Accessed October 2025. [2] Douglas G Altman. 1990. Practical statistics for medical research . Chapman and Hall/CRC. [3] Apple Inc. 2017. Device Check API. https://developer.apple.com/documentation/ devicecheck. Accessed October 2025. [4] Apple Inc. 2025. Core ML | Apple Developer Documentation. https://developer. apple.com/machine-learning/core-ml/. Accessed: 2025-10-24. [5] Nicolas Bettenburg, Sascha Just, Adrian Schröter, Cathrin Weiss, Rahul Premraj, and Thomas Zimmermann. 2008. What makes a good bug report?. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of software engineering . 308–318. [6] Lili Bo, Wangjie Ji, Xiaobing Sun, Ting Zhang, Xiaoxue Wu, and Ying Wei. 2024. ChatBR: Automated assessment and improvement of bug report quality using ChatGPT. In Proceedings of the 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Au-tomated Software Engineering, ASE 2024, Sacramento, CA, USA, October 27 - No-vember 1, 2024 , Vladimir Filkov, Baishakhi Ray, and Minghui Zhou (Eds.). ACM, 1472–1483. doi:10.1145/3691620.3695518 [7] Silvia Breu, Rahul Premraj, Jonathan Sillito, and Thomas Zimmermann. 2010. Information needs in bug reports: improving cooperation between developers and users. In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work . 301–310. [8] Oscar Chaparro, Carlos Bernal-Cárdenas, Jing Lu, Kevin Moran, Andrian Marcus, Massimiliano Di Penta, Denys Poshyvanyk, and Vincent Ng. 2019. Assessing the quality of the steps to reproduce in bug reports. In Proceedings of the 2019 27th ACM joint meeting on european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering . 86–96. [9] Xiaoting Du, Zhihao Liu, Chenglong Li, Xiangyue Ma, Yingzhuo Li, and Xinyu Wang. 2024. LLM-BRC: A large language model-based bug report classification framework. Software Quality Journal 32, 3 (2024), 985–1005. [10] Mindy Nunez Duffourc, Sara Gerke, and Konrad Kollnig. 2023. Privacy of personal data in the generative AI data lifecycle. NYU J. Intell. Prop. & Ent. L. 13 (2023), 219. [11] Georgios Feretzakis, Konstantinos Papaspyridis, Aris Gkoulalas-Divanis, and Vassilios S Verykios. 2024. Privacy-preserving techniques in generative ai and large language models: a narrative review. Information 15, 11 (2024), 697. [12] Yubin Ge, Ziang Xiao, Jana Diesner, Heng Ji, Karrie Karahalios, and Hari Sun-daram. 2022. What should i ask: A knowledge-driven approach for follow-up questions generation in conversational surveys. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10977 

(2022). [13] María Gómez, Bram Adams, Walid Maalej, Martin Monperrus, and Romain Rou-voy. 2017. App store 2.0: From crowdsourced information to actionable feedback in mobile ecosystems. IEEE Software 34, 2 (2017), 81–89. [14] Safwat Hassan, Chakkrit Tantithamthavorn, Cor-Paul Bezemer, and Ahmed E Hassan. 2018. Studying the dialogue between users and developers of free apps in the google play store. Empirical Software Engineering 23 (2018), 1275–1312. [15] Petra Heck and Andy Zaidman. 2017. A framework for quality assessment of just-in-time requirements: the case of open source feature requests. Requirements Engineering 22, 4 (2017), 453–473. [16] Mia Mohammad Imran, Agnieszka Ciborowska, and Kostadin Damevski. 2021. Automatically selecting follow-up questions for deficient bug reports. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 18th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR) .IEEE, 167–178. [17] Apple Inc. 2016. Swift Packages. https://developer.apple.com/documentation/ xcode/swift-packages. Accessed: 2025-10-17. [18] Apple Inc. 2019. SwiftUI. https://developer.apple.com/xcode/swiftui/. Accessed: 2025-10-17. [19] Maor Ivgi, Uri Shaham, and Jonathan Berant. 2023. Efficient long-text understand-ing with short-text models. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 11 (2023), 284–299. [20] Hiba Khan, Pasit Sararueangpong, Frank Mathmann, and Di Wang. 2024. Con-sumers’ promotion focus mitigates the negative effects of chatbots on purchase likelihood. Journal of Consumer Behaviour 23, 3 (2024), 1528–1539. [21] Ardon Kotey, Tejan Gupta, Shivendra Bharuka, Abhishek Singh, Nikhil Ghugare, and Lalith Samanthapuri. 2024. Preserving Privacy in Multimedia: Text-Aware Sensitive Information Masking for Visual Data. International Journal of Scientific Research in Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology 4, 1 (2024), 166–174. [22] Souvik Kundu, Qian Lin, and Hwee Tou Ng. 2020. Learning to identify follow-up questions in conversational question answering. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics . 959–968. [23] Eduard Kuric, Peter Demcak, and Matus Krajcovic. 2025. Unmoderated usability studies evolved: Can gpt ask useful follow-up questions? International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 41, 15 (2025), 9752–9769. [24] J Richard Landis and Gary G Koch. 1977. The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data. biometrics (1977), 159–174. [25] Jonathan Lazar, Jinjuan Heidi Feng, and Harry Hochheiser. 2017. Research Methods in Human-Computer Interaction . Morgan Kaufmann. [26] Gunwoong Lee and T. S. Raghu. 2014. Determinants of Mobile Apps’ Success: Evidence from the App Store Market. 31, 2 (2014), 133–170. doi:10.2753/MIS0742-1222310206 [27] Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. 2024. Lost in the Middle: How Language Models Use Long Contexts. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics 12 (2024), 157–173. doi:10. 1162/TACL_A_00638 [28] Walid Maalej, Volodymyr Biryuk, Jialiang Wei, and Fabian Panse. 2025. On the automated processing of user feedback. In Handbook on Natural Language Processing for Requirements Engineering . Springer, 279–308. [29] Walid Maalej and Hadeer Nabil. 2015. Bug report, feature request, or simply praise? on automatically classifying app reviews. In 2015 IEEE 23rd international requirements engineering conference (RE) . IEEE, 116–125. [30] Cristián Mansilla, Arthur Sweetman, Gordon Guyatt, and John N Lavis. 2024. A taxonomy of demand-driven questions for use by evidence producers, intermedi-aries and decision-makers: results from a cross-sectional survey. Health Research Policy and Systems 22, 1 (2024), 78. [31] Daniel Martens and Walid Maalej. 2019. Release Early, Release Often, and Watch Your Users’ Emotions: Lessons From Emotional Patterns. 36, 5 (2019), 32–37. doi:10.1109/MS.2019.2923603 [32] Daniel Martens and Walid Maalej. 2019. Extracting and Analyzing Context Infor-mation in User-Support Conversations on Twitter. In 2019 IEEE 27th International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE) . 131–141. doi:10.1109/RE.2019.00024 [33] Nestor Maslej, Loredana Fattorini, Raymond Perrault, Yolanda Gil, Vanessa Parli, Njenga Kariuki, Emily Capstick, Anka Reuel, Erik Brynjolfsson, John Etchemendy, et al . 2025. Artificial intelligence index report 2025. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.07139 

(2025). [34] Yanis Najy Miraoui and Paul Woringer. 2024. Enhancing Privacy: Automated De-tection and Blurring of Sensitive Information in Images and Video Feeds . Technical Report. Stanford University. https://cs231n.stanford.edu/2024/papers/enhancing-privacy-automated-detection-and-blurring-of-sensitive-.pdf 𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝐴𝐼𝑑𝑒 : Guiding App Users to Submit Rich Feedback Reports by Asking Context-Aware Follow-Up Questions MOBILESoft ’26, April 12, 2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 

[35] Usmi Mukherjee and Mohammad Masudur Rahman. 2025. Bugmentor: Generat-ing Answers to Follow-Up Questions from Software Bug Reports Using Structured Information Retrieval and Neural Text Generation. Available at SSRN 5000516 

(2025). [36] Divya Natesan, Morgan Walker, and Shannon Clark. 2016. Cognitive bias in usability testing. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Human Factors and Ergonomics in Health Care , Vol. 5. SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA, 86–88. [37] Jakob Nielsen. 1994. Usability Engineering . Morgan Kaufmann. [38] OpenAI. 2024. Structured Outputs — OpenAI Platform Documentation. https: //platform.openai.com/docs/guides/structured-outputs. Accessed: 2025-10-22. [39] Dennis Pagano and Walid Maalej. 2013. User Feedback in the Appstore: An Em-pirical Study. In 2013 21st IEEE International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE) . 125–134. doi:10.1109/RE.2013.6636712 [40] Ali Ebrahimi Pourasad and Walid Maalej. 2025. Does GenAI Make Usability Testing Obsolete?. In 2025 IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) (2025-04). 437–449. doi:10.1109/ICSE55347.2025.00138 [41] Ali Ebrahimi Pourasad, Meyssam Saghiri, and Walid Maalej. 2025. Replication Package. https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/ 1EaPuozkCwXMMZedYG4FwK2YsatXThNdW?usp=sharing [42] Norbert Seyff, Gregor Ollmann, and Manfred Bortenschlager. 2014. AppEcho: a user-driven, in situ feedback approach for mobile platforms and applications. In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Mobile Software Engineering and Systems . 99–108. [43] Yuchen Shen, Anmol Singhal, and Travis Breaux. 2025. Requirements Elicitation Follow-Up Question Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02858 (2025). [44] Subin Shin, Jeesun Oh, and Sangwon Lee. 2025. Can LLMs See What I See? A Study on Five Prompt Engineering Techniques for Evaluating UX on a Shopping Site. In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–7. [45] Yang Song, Junayed Mahmud, Ying Zhou, Oscar Chaparro, Kevin Moran, Andrian Marcus, and Denys Poshyvanyk. 2022. Toward interactive bug reporting for (android app) end-users. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering .344–356. [46] Klaas-Jan Stol and Brian Fitzgerald. 2018. The ABC of software engineering research. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) 

27, 3 (2018), 1–51. [47] Shuyan Sun. 2011. Meta-analysis of Cohen’s kappa. Health Services and Outcomes Research Methodology 11 (2011), 145–163. [48] James Tizard, Hechen Wang, Lydia Yohannes, and Kelly Blincoe. 2019. Can a conversation paint a picture? mining requirements in software forums. In 2019 IEEE 27th International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE) . IEEE, 17–27. [49] Pavan Kumar Anasosalu Vasu, Fartash Faghri, Chun-Liang Li, Cem Koc, Nate True, Albert Antony, Gokula Santhanam, James Gabriel, Peter Grasch, Oncel Tuzel, et al . 2025. Fastvlm: Efficient vision encoding for vision language models. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference . 19769– 19780. [50] Jialiang Wei, Anne-Lise Courbis, Thomas Lambolais, Binbin Xu, Pierre Louis Bernard, Gérard Dray, and Walid Maalej. 2024. Getting inspiration for feature elicitation: app store-vs. LLM-based approach. In Proceedings of the 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering . 857–869. [51] Jialiang Wei, Anne-Lise Courbis, Thomas Lambolais, Binbin Xu, Pierre Louis Bernard, Gérard Dray, and Walid Maalej. 2025. GUing: A mobile GUI search engine using a vision-language model. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 34, 4 (2025), 1–30. [52] Jelle Wouters, Abel Menkveld, Sjaak Brinkkemper, and Fabiano Dalpiaz. 2022. Crowd-based requirements elicitation via pull feedback: method and case studies. 

Requirements Engineering 27, 4 (2022), 429–455. [53] Xiaodong Wu, Ran Duan, and Jianbing Ni. 2024. Unveiling security, privacy, and ethical concerns of ChatGPT. Journal of information and intelligence 2, 2 (2024), 102–115. [54] Lisa Zimmermann, Francesca Zerbato, Victoria Gentile, Manuel Resinas, and Barbara Weber. 2025. What Questions Can I Ask? A Taxonomy and Question Catalog for Process Mining Analysis Questions: L. Zimmermann et al. Business & Information Systems Engineering (2025), 1–26.