Title: Gender Bias in MT for a Genderless Language: New Benchmarks for Basque

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.08153v1

Published Time: Tue, 10 Mar 2026 02:01:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# Gender Bias in MT for a Genderless Language: New Benchmarks for Basque 

# Amaia Murillo, Olatz Perez-de-Viñaspre, Naiara Perez 

HiTZ Center - Ixa, University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU 

{name.surname}@ehu.eus 

Abstract 

Large language models (LLMs) and machine translation (MT) systems are increasingly used in our daily lives, but their outputs can reproduce gender bias present in the training data. Most resources for evaluating such biases are designed for English and reflect its sociocultural context, which limits their applicability to other languages. This work addresses this gap by introducing two new datasets to evaluate gender bias in translations involving Basque, a low-resource and genderless language. WinoMT eus adapts the WinoMT benchmark to examine how gender-neutral Basque occupations are translated into gendered languages such as Spanish and French. FLORES +Gender, in turn, extends the FLORES+ benchmark to assess whether translation quality varies when translating from gendered languages (Spanish and English) into Basque depending on the gender of the referent. We evaluate several general-purpose LLMs and open and proprietary MT systems. The results reveal a systematic preference for masculine forms and, in some models, a slightly higher quality for masculine referents. Overall, these findings show that gender bias is still deeply rooted in these models, and highlight the need to develop evaluation methods that consider both linguistic features and cultural context. 

Keywords: Bias, Gender, Machine Translation, Less-Resourced Languages, Basque 

# 1. Introduction 

Language technologies are often trained on huge amounts of uncurated data extracted from the In-ternet and, as a result, they can inherit stereotypes, misrepresentations, derogatory language and other demeaning behaviours that disproportionately af-fect vulnerable and marginalized communities (Gal-legos et al., 2024). When deployed in real-world applications, these systems can reproduce and even amplify such biases, leading to harmful social consequences (Salinas et al., 2023). For that rea-son, evaluating these biases is a key step toward developing fairer models. Among the different forms of bias, gender bias has been one of the most extensively studied (Devinney et al., 2022; Cignarella et al., 2025). However, most evaluation datasets have been de-veloped in English and reflect the sociocultural con-text of English-speaking communities (Zulaika and Saralegi, 2025). Since bias is shaped by culture, these resources cannot be directly applied to other languages, where stereotypes and social dynamics differ (Jin et al., 2024; Oppong et al., 2025). Fur-thermore, these datasets rely on English-specific linguistic features and on cues that may not be applicable to typologically different languages. In fact, this form of bias is often evaluated through ex-plicit gender markers—such as pronouns (Rudinger et al., 2018) or other marked forms (Stanovsky et al., 2019)—but this approach cannot be used in the same manner for languages that lack grammatical gender (Corral and Saralegi, 2022). As a conse-quence, many languages remain underrepresented Mekanikariak N erizainari N deitu zion hanka hautsi zuelako.              

> The mechanic Ncalled the nurse Nbecause she broke her leg.
> WinoMT
> El mecánico Mllam óala enfermera Fporque se hab ía roto la pierna.
> WinoMT eus
> EN-to-EU MT &postedit
> MT to gendered language
> inferred occupation distribution across genders real-world occupation distribution across genders
> do they correlate?

Figure 1: Overview of WinoMT eus . Sentences with gender-neutral ( N) occupation mentions, taken from WinoMT (Stanovsky et al., 2019) and translated to Basque, are translated into a gendered language; we compare the resulting gendered occupation dis-tribution (male M or female F) with real-world data. in bias research, and Basque, in particular, faces a scarcity of resources for evaluating gender bias, as a low-resource and genderless language. To assess this type of bias in languages like Basque, machine translation (MT) offers a partic-ularly useful framework. By translating between gendered and genderless languages, it is possible to observe how models handle gender informa-tion when explicit grammatical cues are present or absent (Zahraei and Emami, 2025; Rarrick et al., 2024). In short, translation not only reveals how                 

> arXiv:2603.08153v1 [cs.CL] 9 Mar 2026 ES F:La conductora Fdel cami ón, de 64 a ños, sali óilesa Fdel accidente.
> FLORES+
> 64 urteko kamioiko gidaria onik atera zen istriputik.
> FLORES+Gender create a contrastive pair
> Kamioiko gidaria, 64 urtekoa, onik atera zen istriputik.
> ES M:El conductor Mdel cami ón, de 64 a ños, sali óileso Mdel accidente.
> EU : 64 urteko kamioi-gidaria Nonik Natera zen istriputik.
> MT to EU MT to EU
> evaluate hypotheses
> is the di ff erence signi fi cant?
> chrF =0.91 chrF =0.76

Figure 2: Overview of FLORES +Gender. Using Basque-gendered language pairs from FLORES+, 3 we create a contrastive version of the gendered sentence (male M or female F). Both are translated into Basque, and translation quality is compared to asses the effect of source-sentence gender. gender disparities can manifest in practical scenar-ios, but also serves as a tool to uncover systematic gender preferences in the models. In this work, we release two datasets designed to assess gender-related bias in Basque systems through MT. WinoMT eus 1 (see Fig. 1) focuses on how gender-neutral Basque occupations are ren-dered in gendered target languages, and, for the first time, whether they align with official employ-ment statistics from the Basque Country. FLO-RES +Gender 2 (see Fig. 2) studies whether trans-lation quality varies when translating from gendered languages (Spanish and English) into Basque de-pending on the gender of the referent. Together, these resources provide a framework for evaluat-ing gender bias in Basque MT and contribute to broadening bias evaluation beyond English. 

# 2. Background and Related Work 

Gender bias in natural language processing (NLP) is a specific form of social bias that refers to un-equal treatment or outcomes based on gender, of-ten caused by historical and structural inequalities. It can manifest as intrinsic bias—encoded in the model’s internal representations—or as extrinsic bias—which emerges in downstream tasks such as question answering or sentiment analysis (Guo et al., 2024). These inequities can result in repre-sentational and allocational harms, shaping how groups are depicted and how resources are dis-tributed (Crawford, 2017). Evaluating these biases is crucial for building fairer language technologies. 

> 1

https://github.com/amaiamurillo/ winomteus 

> 2

https://github.com/amaiamurillo/ flores_plus_gender 

> 3

https://huggingface.co/datasets/ openlanguagedata/flores_plus 

2.1. Bias Evaluation Resources 

Most existing bias evaluation datasets to date have been created for English. These include Wino-style counterfactual benchmarks such as Winogen-der (Rudinger et al., 2018) and WinoBias (Zhao et al., 2018), where pairs of minimally different sen-tences reveal stereotypical associations in model predictions, as well as other sentence-pair re-sources such as GAP (Webster et al., 2018), BUG (Levy et al., 2021) or BEC-Pro (Bartl et al., 2020). These resources have proved influential but remain tightly coupled to the grammatical and sociocul-tural properties of English, which features gen-dered pronouns and agreement patterns that do not generalize to typologically different languages. Prompt-based datasets (e.g., RealToxicityPrompts (Gehman et al., 2020), BOLD (Dhamala et al., 2021)) have extended bias assessment to genera-tive settings, yet such resources are again largely English-specific. Consequently, most low-resource and genderless languages lack dedicated bench-marks for gender bias evaluation. 

2.2. Basque and Existing Work 

Basque is a language isolate spoken by approx-imately three-quarters of a million people, most of whom reside in the Basque Country, a territory spanning areas of both Spain and France (Soraluze et al., 2016). Basque does not have grammati-cal gender, unlike its neighboring languages Span-ish and French, and even personal pronouns are gender-neutral. Still, the absence of grammatical gender does not prevent the reproduction of bias, as language use itself can encode and transmit social stereotypes. Gender is conveyed through lexical choices: gender identity terms ( mutil ‘boy’, 

emakume ‘woman’), kinship terminology ( izeba 

‘aunt’, aitona ‘grandfather’), occupations ( andereño 

‘female schoolteacher’, maisu ‘male schoolteacher’) and proper names ( Aitor, Lander and Asier are typ-ically associated with men, whereas Ane, Lide and 

Nahia are commonly given to women). Despite growing interest, resources for gender-bias evaluation in Basque remains scarce. The most closely related effort is the TANDO project (Gete et al., 2022, 2025), which introduced contrastive Basque-Spanish test sets to examine gender selection and register phenomena in MT. In their setup, Basque source sentences were gender-neutral but required gendered translation to Spanish; translation quality was then com-pared across masculine and feminine references. TANDO therefore provided the first resource for assessing gender bias in Basque MT, specifically for the Basque-to-Spanish direction. 

2.3. Gender Bias Evaluation through MT 

MT offers a natural framework for evaluating gen-der bias in languages without grammatical gen-der. When translating from a genderless language (e.g., Basque or Turkish) into a gendered one (e.g., Spanish or English), models must make an explicit gender choice. Over many examples, a system-atic preference for one gender can reveal underly-ing bias (Stanovsky et al., 2019; Mastromichalakis et al., 2025). Conversely, translation from a gen-dered into genderless language allows researchers to measure whether translation quality differs by gendered input forms (Costa-jussà et al., 2023). Building on this tradition, our work expands the scope of Basque MT bias evaluation in two ways. First, we present WinoMT eus , a counterfactual Wino-style dataset for translating from Basque into gendered languages, where both masculine and feminine translations are plausible, and compare their distribution to official employment statistics, fol-lowing Mastromichalakis et al. (2025). Second, we introduce FLORES +Gender , which extends FLO-RES+ to evaluate translations into Basque from gendered languages (Spanish and English), testing whether gendered source forms affect translation quality. TANDO included Spanish to Basque but not English to Basque, making this the first multilin-gual setup of its kind for Basque. 

# 3. WinoMT eus 

We translated and adapted WinoMT (Stanovsky et al., 2019) into Basque to examine how gender is assigned when translating gender-neutral occupa-tions into gendered languages. The original dataset is a concatenation of Winogender (Rudinger et al., 2018) and WinoBias (Zhao et al., 2018), which are two widely known template-based datasets for as-sessing occupational stereotypes through coref-erence resolution. Each instance includes two gender-neutral occupations and a pronoun that refers to one of them, and the model is required to resolve the ambiguity (see Fig. 1). This task cannot be applied to Basque in the same way as in English, given that Basque lacks gendered pronouns. Hence, we translated the orig-inal dataset and created a Basque version, called 

WinoMT eus , to analyze how models render these professions when translating into gendered lan-guages such as Spanish or French. The adaptation process involved five main stages: 1. Glossary creation. We created a glossary of 78 occupations to align English terms with culturally and linguistically equivalent forms in Basque. This process required dealing with issues such as the lack of lexical equivalents or professions without cultural counterparts. 2. Translation. The original English dataset was translated into Basque using GPT-4o. 3. Post-editing and revision. We post-edited the translated sentences while addressing the pitfalls identified by Blodgett et al. (2021) present in the original dataset, including gram-matical errors, sentence structure issues, logi-cal failures and unnatural phrasing. 4. Cultural adaptation. Contextually sensitive elements were adjusted to fit the Basque con-text (e.g., emergency numbers, currency and units of measurement). 5. Final filtering. Duplicated sentences were removed, as several English sentences differ only in pronoun gender and therefore resulted in identical translations in Basque. The resulting dataset includes 1,827 sentences in Basque with at least one occupation mention. 

# 4. FLORES +Gender 

FLORES +Gender is built on the FLORES+ bench-mark (NLLB Team et al., 2024), developed by Meta to assess MT systems for low-resource languages. The original dataset contains 1,012 sentences in English, evenly sampled from Wikinews, Wikijunior and Wikivoyage, translated into around 200 lan-guages and varieties, including Basque, Spanish, Catalan, Valencian and Galician. Adopting the approach of Costa-jussà et al. (2023), we reversed the translation direction to study whether the grammatical gender of the source text affects translation performance into 

Basque. Specifically, we selected two source lan-guages with different degrees of gender marking: Spanish, a strongly gendered language, and En-glish, a weakly gendered one where gender is mostly conveyed through personal pronouns, pos-sessive adjectives and gender-specific nouns. For each source language, we construct con-trastive versions of the dataset: one containing all the sentences in masculine form and another with the same sentences in feminine form. From the ME PN UM       

> Spanish 24.52 19.65 60.01 English 29.03 49.68 n/a

Table 1: Quantification of FLORES +Gender anno-tated phenomena (% over total sentences). original Spanish set, we identified 363 sentences 

with gendered references, and 155 in the English 

version. These were manually adapted to produce gender-controlled pairs while maintaining seman-tic equivalence. In addition, each sentence was manually annotated for 

• ME : whether it contains mentions to multiple gendered human entities, 

• PN : the presence of proper names, and 

• UM : the presence of unmarked usage of the masculine form (applies only in Spanish). These annotations, quantified in Tab. 1, support downstream analysis of whether such factors influ-ence translation quality. When adapting the data, we followed consistent criteria to ensure coherence and cultural plausi-bility. Proper names were replaced with alterna-tives of the opposite gender, prioritizing equiva-lents with similar spelling and cultural origin (e.g., 

Cristina F/Cristian M ). In the case of highly recogniz-able names (e.g., Fernando Alonso ), we employed plausible alternatives whenever the context allows. For multi-entity sentences, we focused on mod-ifying the main subject or the most contextually relevant gendered entity in the sentence instead. We also addressed various errors encountered dur-ing the annotation process. These included typos, unnecessary or missing words, as well as transla-tion inconsistencies and gender agreement issues present in the original sets. Finally, after producing the two gender-specific sets for each source language, we manually gener-ated the two corresponding Basque sets with the same modifications, aimed at serving as a refer-ence for automatic evaluation. 

# 5. Experimental Setup 

The goal of our experiments is to assess how gen-der bias manifests in MT involving Basque, using the two new resources introduced in this work. That is, we design complementary evaluations that ex-amine gender bias both from Basque into gendered target languages and into Basque from other lan-guages, using controlled datasets and quantitative metrics. 

5.1. Evaluation Methodology 

This section describes the evaluation procedures employed to analyse gender bias in translation in both directions. We leverage the two datasets pre-sented in §3 and §4 to perform, respectively, i) an analysis of how gender is expressed when translat-ing from Basque into gendered languages (Spanish and French), and ii) an analysis of how transla-tion into Basque behaves with respect to gender-marked referents. 

5.1.1. WinoMT eus : from Basque 

This experiment analyses whether translation from Basque into a gendered language reinforces gen-der stereotypes or reflects actual labour distribution in the Basque Country. The evaluation consists in (see Fig. 1) i) machine-translating the dataset into Spanish and French, ii) extracting the mentions of occupations in the translations and labelling their gender, and iii) comparing the translated occupa-tions’ distribution to real-world labour statistics. In what follows, we detail the methodology employed to extract, gender-label, and evaluate the occupa-tions obtained from the translated corpus. 

Occupation extraction. We automatically ex-tracted the professions with Claude 4 Sonnet. For the prompt, we adopted a one-shot approach, giv-ing the model an instruction to extract the occu-pations from the Spanish and French translations, along with one example showing how to perform the task (further details are available in Appendix A). In this process, we retrieved both the profession and the preceding article, and if no occupational term was detected, the output was marked as [MISS-ING] . To validate this extraction method, we man-ually checked 100 randomly selected sentences, and obtained 95.5% of accuracy in occupation ex-traction. Next, we inferred the gender of each pro-fession based on the gender of the article. In cases where the article was not enough to determine the gender, we relied on the morphological end-ing of the occupation (e.g., l’infirmier er er er er er er er er er er er er er er er er M /l’infirmière ère ère ère ère ère ère ère ère ère ère ère ère ère ère ère ère F

or l’administrateur teur teur teur teur teur teur teur teur teur teur teur teur teur teur teur teur M /l’administratrice trice trice trice trice trice trice trice trice trice trice trice trice trice trice trice trice F). 

Labour statistics. To evaluate the extent to which model biases reflect real-world disparities, we follow prior work by Mastromichalakis et al. (2025), Ibaraki et al. (2024) and Touileb et al. (2022), comparing our results with actual labour dis-tribution statistics. These statistics for the Basque Country were retrieved from Lanbide, 3 the public employment service, as of July 2025. We manu-ally mapped the profession categories provided by 

> 3https://www.lanbide.euskadi.eus

Lanbide to our glossary (see §3) in order to iden-tify the closest corresponding occupations. This allowed us to conduct two complementary evalu-ations: one at the aggregate level, comparing the overall distribution of masculine and feminine trans-lations with labour statistics, and another at the profession level, analysing correlations for each occupation individually. 

Evaluation Metrics. On the one hand, we com-puted the Pearson correlation coefficient be-tween the percentages of feminine and mascu-line translations for each occupation and the corre-sponding labour statistics to evaluate how closely the gender proportions in the model translations align with real-world data. On the other hand, we applied the GRAPE (Gender RAtion Probabili-tiEs ) metric, introduced by Mastromichalakis et al. (2025), to carry out a more detailed analysis at pro-fession level. This metric measures gender bias by comparing how frequently a model generates masculine or feminine forms relative to a reference distribution. It quantifies both the direction of the bias (GRAPE-M for masculine, GRAPE-F for femi-nine) and its magnitude (how strong that tendency is), starting from -1. For instance, a GRAPE-F value of 0.0 means that the system generates the same proportion of feminine forms as the reference distri-bution, whereas a value of 1.0 means that feminine forms are produced twice as often as expected. 

5.1.2. FLORES +Gender: into Basque 

Adopting the methodology of Costa-jussà et al. (2023), we reversed the translation direction to analyse whether the translation quality varies de-pending on the gender of the referent in the source sentence. For this purpose, we translated into Basque the English and Spanish versions of the 

FLORES +Gender dataset. We first evaluated over-all translation quality across masculine and femi-nine subsets to detect global trends. Subsequently, we exploited the dataset’s fine-grained annotations to disaggregate results by the linguistic and contex-tual factors explained in §4 and Tab. 1. 

Evaluation metrics. We compared the transla-tions to their corresponding references employ-ing standard automatic metrics using the Sacre-BLEU toolkit (Post, 2018): character-level F-score (chrF++; Popović, 2017) and Translation Edit Rate (TER; Snover et al., 2006). To determine whether the observed differences between mas-culine and feminine subsets were statistically sig-nificant, we applied the paired approximate ran-domization test (Riezler and Maxwell, 2005) with 10,000 random permutations and significance lev-els p < 0.01 , p < 0.05 , and p < 0.1.

5.2. Models and Inference Setup 

With the above described datasets, we assessed how gender bias manifests in MT across three dif-ferent technical paradigms. 

General-purpose LLMs. In this category, we evaluated Latxa 3.1 8B Instruct 4 and Latxa 3.1 70B Instruct 5, two general-purpose instructed LLMs for Basque developed by Sainz et al. (2025). Both are based on Llama 3.1 8B Instruct 6 and 

Llama 3.1 70B Instruct 7 (Grattafiori et al., 2024), which were also included in the evaluation. All four models were deployed with vLLM (Kwon et al., 2023), using a single A100 GPU for the 8B variants and two GPUs for 70B ones. We used the models’ default generation settings with the temperature fixed at 0 to ensure reproducible results. Additionally, we also assessed GPT-5 8, ac-cessed via OpenAI API, with reasoning effort set to 

minimal . Claude Sonnet 4 9 was evaluated using Anthropic’s API with the temperature also fixed at 

0. The last model in this category, DeepSeek-V3.2-Exp Non-thinking (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025), was run via its API using default generation parameters. Beyond general-purpose models, we also in-cluded SalamandraTA 7B Instruct 10 (Gilabert et al., 2025), an instruction-tuned translation model derived from SalamandraTA 7B Base that supports 35 European languages, among them Basque, Spanish, English, French, Aragonese, Asturian and Catalan. The system and user prompts used across all models are provided in Appendix A. 

Open NMT models. Among open neural ma-chine translation (NMT) models, we tested 

MADLAD-400-3B-MT 11 (Kudugunta et al., 2023), a multilingual model covering 400 languages; NLLB-200’s 3.3B variant 12 (NLLB Team et al., 2024), designed to support low-resource languages and supports 200 language pairs; and HiTZ Center’s 

> 4https://huggingface.co/HiTZ/ Latxa-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
> 5https://huggingface.co/HiTZ/ Latxa-Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct
> 6https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/ Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
> 7https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/ Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct
> 8https://cdn.openai.com/ gpt-5-system-card.pdf
> 9https://www.anthropic.com/news/ claude-4
> 10 https://huggingface.co/BSC-LT/ salamandra-7b-instruct
> 11 https://huggingface.co/google/ madlad400-3b-mt
> 12 https://huggingface.co/facebook/ nllb-200-3.3B

Spanish-Basque and English-Basque MT mod-els 13 . To translate the sentences, we loaded each model and its corresponding tokenizer from Hug-ging Face using the Transformers library and gen-erated outputs with the default settings. 

Proprietary translation services. As a refer-ence for deployed MT systems, we assessed vari-ous proprietary translation services. Such systems provide limited transparency with respect to their internal architectures. We included Google Trans-late , the widely used commercial MT service devel-oped by Google that covers over 100 languages (ac-cessed through the Cloud Translation API); Elia 14 

developed by Elhuyar Foundation and supporting Basque, Spanish, French, English, Catalan and Galician; Batua 15 , created by Vicomtech and cov-ering Basque, Spanish, French and English; and 

Itzuli 16 , provided by the Basque Government and supporting the same languages as Batua. Trans-lations with Elia, Batua, and Itzuli were obtained manually through their public web interfaces. 

# 6. Results 

Moderate alignment with labour distributions. 

This analysis of the WinoMT eus experiments as-sesses the extent to which model outputs reflect the actual occupational gender distribution. When translating from Basque into Spanish, GPT 5 ,

NLLB-200-3.3B and Latxa 3.1 70B Instruct show the highest correlation ( r > 0.4, p < 0.01 ), which indicates a moderate positive relationship between the gendered forms produced by the models and the real-world gender distribution of professions (see Tab. 2). For Basque–French translations, cor-relations are generally lower, although the rank-ing of systems remains broadly similar. This drop may be due to cross-linguistic differences in gen-der marking or to disparities in the training data available for French. A closer look at the Llama-based models reveals that Latxa ’s adaptation to Basque notably improves alignment compared to its Llama 3.1 counterparts of the same size. This suggests that targeted language adaptation can enhance a model’s sensitivity to gender patterns present in specific linguistic contexts. More broadly, models explicitly trained or fine-tuned for translation tasks (e.g., NLLB-200-3.3B, SalamandraTA 7B In-struct, GPT 5) tend to achieve higher correlations than purely general-purpose systems, while smaller instruction-tuned LLMs such as Latxa 3.1 8B and Llama 3.1 8B show weaker alignment.                                

> 13 No Basque-French MT system was available from the HiTZ Center at the time of this study.
> 14 https://elia.eus/itzultzailea
> 15 https://www.batua.eus/
> 16 https://www.euskadi.eus/itzuli/
> EU-ES EU-FR
> Llama 3.1 8B Instruct 0.066 0.158 Latxa 3.1 8B Instruct 0.270 ** 0.311 ***
> Llama 3.1 70B Instruct 0.215 *0.254 **
> Latxa 3.1 70B Instruct 0.409 *** 0.352 ***
> DeepSeek-V3.2-Exp 0.259 ** 0.275 **
> Claude 4 Sonnet 0.191 *0.166 GPT 5 0.487 *** 0.424 ***
> SalamandraTA 7B Instruct 0.276 ** 0.354 ***
> MADLAD-400-3B-MT 0.385 *** 0.195 *
> NLLB-200-3.3B 0.440 *** 0.430 ***
> HiTZ MT eu-es 0.369 *** –Google Translate 0.390 *** 0.359 ***
> Batua 0.320 *** 0.280 **
> Itzuli 0.284 ** 0.258 **
> Elia 0.246 ** 0.243 **

Table 2: Pearson correlation coefficients ( r) be-tween Lanbide’s labour statistics and model transla-tions from WinoMT eus to Spanish and French. The highest correlation per language pair is highlighted in bold. *** p < 0.01 , ** p < 0.05 , *p < 0.1                

> Occupation Real female proportion (%) GRAPE-M ES FR
> housekeeper 96.5 23.4 24.6 tailor 92.7 12.4 12.5 receptionist 89.3 7.7 7.9 cashier 86.8 6.9 6.6 hairdresser 86.2 5.9 5.9

Table 3: Top five most feminized occupations in the real-world data showing the highest masculine bias scores (GRAPE-M) across all translation models. 

Masculine overrepresentation. To complement the correlation analysis, we next examined the di-rection and magnitude of gender bias using the GRAPE metric. Results from the WinoMT eus ex-periment show that all models systematically favour masculine realizations of occupations, both in Span-ish and French. The occupation most consistently overrepresented as masculine is housekeeper , de-spite being highly feminized in the Basque labour market (96.5% female). In Spanish, Claude 4 Son-net , Elia , and DeepSeek-V3.2-Exp deviate the most from the expected gender distribution for this profession, whereas Latxa 3.1 70B , NLLB-200-3.3B , and GPT 5 produce more faithful transla-tions. Other highly feminized professions—such as tailor , receptionist , cashier , hairdresser , and 

salesperson —also exhibit strong masculine pref-erences, with similar GRAPE-M values in both tar-get languages (see Tab. 3). Instances of feminine overrepresentation are rare. Only ten cases dis-play GRAPE-F values above 1.0, and most corre-spond to translation errors or lexical ambiguities. For example, in Spanish, MADLAD-400-3B-MT at-tains the highest GRAPE-F score (3.09) for ertzain 

(Basque police officer ), often mistranslated as la Ertzaintza , referring to the institution rather than an individual. The only occupation that consistently appears predominantly in the feminine form across several models is nurse , with GRAPE-F values of 0.18 in Spanish and 0.16 in French. However, these scores remain close to zero, feminine overrepresen-tation being very weak compared to the masculine one observed earlier. 

Limited gender effects on translation quality. 

Using FLORES +Gender, we evaluated whether translation quality differs across masculine and fem-inine sentence variants. We computed the average difference in translation quality between mascu-line and feminine subsets using the chrF++ and TER metrics and assessed the statistical signifi-cance of the observed differences through paired approximate randomization. At first glance, results in Tab. 4 suggest that, in general, models trans-late better when the referent is masculine in the Spanish-Basque direction. Nevertheless, most dif-ferences are small and not significant. The only exception is Batua , which exhibits significant differ-ences in both metrics, consistently achieving better scores on masculine sentences. On the contrary, in the case of English as the source language, NLLB-200-3.3B shows a significant difference in the oppo-site direction in terms of chrF++, suggesting slightly better performance on feminine sentences. 

Impact of annotated linguistic phenomena. To carry out a more detailed analysis, we used the an-notations of the dataset to explore whether gender-related patterns observed persist under different conditions, such as the presence of multiple gen-dered entities, gendered proper names or the use of unmarked masculine forms. The values reported in Tab. 5 correspond to the difference between mas-culine–feminine performance when each factor is present compared to when it is not. In our analyses, most gender-related differences were not statistically significant; however, sev-eral systems show significant or systematic ten-dencies under specific conditions. When sen-tences include multiple gendered entities, HiTZ MT tends to yield higher scores for masculine con-texts in either language pair (e.g., Es poco prob-able que el conductor el conductor el conductor el conductor el conductor el conductor el conductor el conductor el conductor el conductor el conductor el conductor el conductor el conductor el conductor el conductor el conductor M del vehículo que embis-tió al fotógrafo al fotógrafo al fotógrafo al fotógrafo al fotógrafo al fotógrafo al fotógrafo al fotógrafo al fotógrafo al fotógrafo al fotógrafo al fotógrafo al fotógrafo al fotógrafo al fotógrafo al fotógrafo al fotógrafo M sea procesado penalmente , or 

Liggins Liggins Liggins Liggins Liggins Liggins Liggins Liggins Liggins Liggins Liggins Liggins Liggins Liggins Liggins Liggins Liggins M followed in his his his his his his his his his his his his his his his his his M father father father father father father father father father father father father father father father father father M ’s footsteps and entered a career in medicine ). Itzuli also achieves significantly better (lower TER) performance in mas-                                                                

> ES-EU EN-EU chrF++ TER chrF++ TER
> Llama 3.1 8B Instruct 0.22 -21.07 0.00 -60.71 Latxa 3.1 8B Instruct 0.14 -0.50 -0.11 0.60 Llama 3.1 70B Instruct 0.20 3.01 -0.42 -0.44 Latxa 3.1 70B Instruct 0.14 0.11 -0.22 -0.44 DeepSeek-V3.2-Exp -0.24 -0.29 -0.59 1.22 Claude Sonnet 4 -0.12 0.16 -1.08 ∗-0.53 GPT 5 -0.36 0.50 -0.25 0.92 SalamandraTA 7B Instruct 0.20 -0.33 -0.03 -0.36 MADLAD-400-3B-MT 0.19 0.35 -0.13 -1.13 NLLB-200-3.3B -0.49 -0.05 -1.50 ∗-0.87 HiTZ MT 0.24 0.22 -0.14 1.27 Google Translate 0.26 0.85 ∗0.01 0.77 Batua 0.43 ∗0.97 ∗-1.00 -0.82 Itzuli 0.22 0.63 -0.28 0.28 Elia 0.17 0.48 -0.29 0.45

Table 4: Average difference ( ∆) between mas-culine and feminine contrastive sets from FLO-RES +Gender. Positive values ( green ) indicate higher performance on the masculine set, and neg-ative values ( orange ) indicate higher performance on the feminine set. Statistically significant results are marked in boldface. *p < 0.05 .culine multi-entity settings when translating from Spanish. Regarding proper names, Elia and NLLB-200-3.3B perform significantly better with feminine referents when translating from Spanish, as in De-spués de eso, Kavita Paudwal Kavita Paudwal Kavita Paudwal Kavita Paudwal Kavita Paudwal Kavita Paudwal Kavita Paudwal Kavita Paudwal Kavita Paudwal Kavita Paudwal Kavita Paudwal Kavita Paudwal Kavita Paudwal Kavita Paudwal Kavita Paudwal Kavita Paudwal Kavita Paudwal F pasó al frente para cantar los bhajans . Other systems show no clear advantage for either gender. In contrast, when translating from English, four models— Latxa-70B ,

DeepSeek-V3.2-Exp , Batua and Itzuli — show sig-nificant advantages for masculine names. Among the examined variables, the use of unmarked mas-culine (only applicable in Spanish) had the most consistent impact. Systems like NLLB-200-3.3B ,

Itzuli and Elia achieved better results for sentences containing unmarked masculine forms compared to their feminine counterparts (e.g., Los parisinos Los parisinos Los parisinos Los parisinos Los parisinos Los parisinos Los parisinos Los parisinos Los parisinos Los parisinos Los parisinos Los parisinos Los parisinos Los parisinos Los parisinos Los parisinos Los parisinos M

tienen reputación de egocéntricos, descorteses y engreídos ). 

# 7. Discussion 

The results indicate that current MT systems and LLMs continue to reproduce gender asymmetries. In translation from Basque into gendered target lan-guages, all evaluated systems show a systematic preference for masculine realizations of gender-neutral occupational terms. This behaviour is con-sistent with earlier reports of related work on other language pairs (Gete and Etchegoyhen, 2024; Mas-tromichalakis et al., 2025; Vanmassenhove et al., 2018; Schiebinger, 2014; Monti, 2020) and reflects the grammatical conventions of target languages where masculine forms function as the unmarked default, such as Spanish and French. ES-EU EN-EU ME PN UM ME PN chrF++ TER chrF++ TER chrF++ TER chrF++ TER chrF++ TER                                                                                                                                                       

> Llama 3.1 8B Instruct 0.44 -130.60 -0.28 -33.64 1.00 34.65 1.02 -65.17 2.06 0.61 Latxa 3.1 8B Instruct -0.74 0.17 -0.33 -1.74 0.07 1.29 0.65 -0.75 0.43 0.75 Llama 3.1 70B Instruct 0.08 -28.39 -0.26 -31.92 0.07 -6.83 1.57 ∗2.52 0.92 2.84 Latxa 3.1 70B Instruct -0.28 0.31 0.08 0.43 -0.12 -0.24 1.79 2.22 1.87 ∗2.73 DeepSeek-V3.2-Exp 0.80 2.03 0.21 1.52 -0.26 -0.81 0.00 1.32 1.08 4.23 ∗∗
> Claude Sonnet 4 0.38 0.00 -0.46 -0.94 0.12 0.27 1.34 0.91 -1.14 -1.27 GPT 5 0.53 0.19 -0.36 -0.17 0.54 1.23 1.55 1.62 -0.44 -0.30 SalamandraTA 7B Instruct -0.10 1.45 -0.55 -0.68 0.45 -0.55 -0.14 1.64 -1.68 -0.80 MADLAD-400-3B-MT 0.42 1.17 -0.62 -2.23 0.24 0.26 0.61 2.09 -1.12 -2.42 NLLB-200-3.3B -0.07 0.36 -1.44 ∗-1.09 1.88 ∗∗ 2.05 ∗∗ 0.59 0.00 -0.19 2.16 HiTZ MT 0.84 ∗∗ 0.58 -0.34 -1.12 0.56 1.01 2.27 ∗∗ 4.53 ∗∗ 0.80 2.00 Google Translate -0.31 0.93 0.36 0.66 0.30 0.47 1.59 1.58 0.85 2.22 Batua 0.00 -0.07 0.10 -0.52 -0.41 -0.08 1.27 2.99 0.58 3.30 ∗
> Itzuli 0.50 1.59 ∗-0.42 0.73 1.05 ∗∗ 0.33 0.33 2.00 0.15 2.38 ∗
> Elia -0.21 -1.18 -1.00 ∗-2.43 ∗∗ 1.19 ∗∗ 1.89 ∗∗ 1.54 2.53 0.78 1.05

Table 5: Interaction effect ( ∆) between gender and linguistic factors (ME = Multi-entity, PN = Proper names, UM = Unmarked masculine) across both Spanish-Basque (ES-EU) and English-Basque (EN-EU) translation directions. Green indicates higher performance on masculine sentences, orange indicates higher performance on feminine ones. Statistically significant results are marked in boldface. ** p < 0.05 ,

> *

p < 0.1

Although all models display a systematic prefer-ence for masculine realizations, the degree of bias varies across occupations. Professions that are predominantly feminine in real data (e.g., house-keeper , tailor , receptionist ) are still often translated in the masculine—with a few exceptions, notably 

nurse —, yet the moderate correlations with Basque labour statistics indicate that models do capture some aspects of real-world gender distributions. In other words, while translation outputs reflect exist-ing occupational asymmetries to a limited extent, they systematically exaggerate the masculine de-fault due to its higher frequency and unmarked grammatical status in the training data. The analysis of the translation into Basque us-ing FLORES +Gender revealed a weaker and less systematic gender effect. For Spanish sources, most models produced slightly but rarely signifi-cant higher scores for masculine variants, particu-larly in sentences containing the generic masculine (e.g. los investigadores , ‘the researchers’) com-pared to their marked feminine counterparts ( las investigadoras , ‘the female researchers’). These results mirror the bias observed above, and sug-gest that the unmarked status and higher frequency of masculine forms in Spanish data may influence translation quality. In contrast, translations from English, a weakly gendered language, showed no consistent direction of bias: a few models achieved marginally better results for feminine sentences, while other performed slightly better with masculine proper names or multi-entity contexts. 

# 8. Conclusions 

This work introduces two high-quality resources for evaluating gender bias in translation involv-ing Basque, a low-resource and genderless lan-guage. WinoMT eus adapts the WinoMT benchmark to Basque and provides a manually post-edited and culturally localised dataset that enables system-atic assessment of how gender-neutral mentions of occupations are rendered in gendered target languages. Further, each occupation mention in 

WinoMT eus has been manually aligned with offi-cial Basque labour statistics, allowing researches to compare the gender distributions that emerge in model-generated translations against real-world employment data. This design makes it possible to quantify how translation systems reflect or diverge from actual societal gender patterns, an evaluation dimension rarely supported in previous resources. 

FLORES +Gender, in turn, extends the FLO-RES+ benchmark with manually annotated gender-controlled contrastive pairs in Spanish and English. Each sentence has been validated for semantic equivalence and enriched with linguistic annota-tions (i.e., multiple entities, proper names, and un-marked masculine), creating a valuable testbed for analysing how grammatical gender in the source text affects translation quality into Basque. Our experiments confirmed that current MT and LLM systems still default to masculine forms, even when the occupations are clearly associated with women. Regarding translation quality, re-sults were less consistent: translations from Span-ish, a strongly-gendered language, tended to be slightly better for masculine referent in some mod-els, while no clear pattern emerged for English, a weakly-gendered language. Future work will leverage these resources to compare bias patterns across sociocultural contexts and to inform bias-aware training and evaluation practices involving the Basque language. 

# 9. Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the HiTZ Chair of Artificial Intelligence and Language Technology (TSI100923-2023-1), funded by MTDFP, Secretaría de Estado de Digitalización e Inteligencia Artificial .Additional support was provided by the Research Project PID2024-157855OB-C32 (MOLVI), funded by MICIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and the Eu-ropean Regional Development Fund (ERDF), EU. It was also funded by the Basque Government (IKER-GAITU project) and the Ministerio para la Transfor-mación Digital y de la Función Pública - Funded by EU – NextGenerationEU within the framework of the project Desarrollo de Modelos ALIA .

# 10. Ethics Statement and Limitations 

Our work has several limitations that should be taken into account. First of all, the LLMs we eval-uated show considerable variability, that is to say, small modifications in prompt design can lead to notable differences in the generated translations. Additionally, these models are typically used with relatively high values of temperature, which further increases randomness in their outputs. Fixing tem-perature at 0 allows to reproduce the experiments, but fails to reflect the variability present in real-world applications. Regarding the newly created datasets, on the one hand, WinoMT eus focuses on a specific type of representational harm—misrepresentation—and covers a narrow domain, occupational representa-tions, which captures only one aspect of gender bias in language technologies. Furthermore, this dataset is template-based, which is useful for con-trolled experimentation, but it does not represent the real use of language. FLORES +Gender, on the other hand, is based on real texts, but still presents some limitations. The size of both English and Spanish gendered sets is relatively small, and this may limit the reliability of the results. Apart from the size, this dataset also includes proper names to infer gender, which must be used carefully, given that relying on personal names without critical con-sideration can introduce or reinforce unintended biases. Translation quality was assessed through automatic metrics, which may not reflect the nu-ances of gender-related differences. Another important limitation is that our ap-proach treats gender as a binary variable (mas-culine/feminine). Although this choice reflects the grammatical systems of the analysed languages, it disregards non-binary and gender-neutral identities and provides an oversimplified view of gender in language. Lastly, it should be noted that bias is a complex phenomenon that can manifest in many different ways depending on the task, domain or social con-text in which the models are used. Therefore, we cannot rely on a single NLP task, bias domain, metric or dataset to determine whether a model is biased. A high or low bias score in our datasets only should not be interpreted as evidence of gener-alized bias or the absence of it, but as an indication of how the model behaves in specific tasks and experimental conditions. 

# 11. Bibliographical References 

Marion Bartl, Malvina Nissim, and Albert Gatt. 2020. Unmasking contextual stereotypes: Measuring and mitigating BERT’s gender bias. In Proceed-ings of the Second Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural Language Processing , pages 1–16, Barcelona, Spain (Online). Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Su Lin Blodgett, Gilsinia Lopez, Alexandra Olteanu, Robert Sim, and Hanna Wallach. 2021. Stereo-typing Norwegian salmon: An inventory of pitfalls in fairness benchmark datasets. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th Inter-national Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1004–1015, Online. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Alessandra Teresa Cignarella, Anastasia Gi-achanou, and Els Lefever. 2025. A survey on stereotype detection in natural language process-ing. ACM Computing Surveys .Ander Corral and Xabier Saralegi. 2022. Gender bias mitigation for NMT involving genderless lan-guages. In Proceedings of the Seventh Con-ference on Machine Translation (WMT) , pages 165–176, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates (Hy-brid). Association for Computational Linguistics. Marta R. Costa-jussà, Pierre Andrews, Eric Smith, Prangthip Hansanti, Christophe Ropers, Elahe Kalbassi, Cynthia Gao, Daniel Licht, and Car-leigh Wood. 2023. Multilingual holistic bias: Ex-tending descriptors and patterns to unveil demo-graphic biases in languages at scale. Kate Crawford. 2017. The trouble with bias. Keynote at NeurIPS. DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingx-uan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Cheng-gang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, Damai Dai, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Deli Chen, Dongjie Ji, Erhang Li, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai, Fuli Luo, Guangbo Hao, Guanting Chen, Guowei Li, H. Zhang, Han Bao, Hanwei Xu, Haocheng Wang, Haowei Zhang, Honghui Ding, Huajian Xin, Huazuo Gao, Hui Li, Hui Qu, J. L. Cai, Jian Liang, Jianzhong Guo, Jiaqi Ni, Ji-ashi Li, Jiawei Wang, Jin Chen, Jingchang Chen, Jingyang Yuan, Junjie Qiu, Junlong Li, Junxiao Song, Kai Dong, Kai Hu, Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Kexin Huang, Kuai Yu, Lean Wang, Lecong Zhang, Lei Xu, Leyi Xia, Liang Zhao, Litong Wang, Liyue Zhang, Meng Li, Miaojun Wang, Mingchuan Zhang, Minghua Zhang, Minghui Tang, Mingming Li, Ning Tian, Panpan Huang, Peiyi Wang, Peng Zhang, Qiancheng Wang, Qi-hao Zhu, Qinyu Chen, Qiushi Du, R. J. Chen, R. L. Jin, Ruiqi Ge, Ruisong Zhang, Ruizhe Pan, Runji Wang, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Ruyi Chen, S. S. Li, Shanghao Lu, Shangyan Zhou, Shanhuang Chen, Shaoqing Wu, Shengfeng Ye, Shengfeng Ye, Shirong Ma, Shiyu Wang, Shuang Zhou, Shuiping Yu, Shunfeng Zhou, Shuting Pan, T. Wang, Tao Yun, Tian Pei, Tianyu Sun, W. L. Xiao, Wangding Zeng, Wanjia Zhao, Wei An, Wen Liu, Wenfeng Liang, Wenjun Gao, Wen-qin Yu, Wentao Zhang, X. Q. Li, Xiangyue Jin, Xianzu Wang, Xiao Bi, Xiaodong Liu, Xiaohan Wang, Xiaojin Shen, Xiaokang Chen, Xiaokang Zhang, Xiaosha Chen, Xiaotao Nie, Xiaowen Sun, Xiaoxiang Wang, Xin Cheng, Xin Liu, Xin Xie, Xingchao Liu, Xingkai Yu, Xinnan Song, Xinxia Shan, Xinyi Zhou, Xinyu Yang, Xinyuan Li, Xuecheng Su, Xuheng Lin, Y. K. Li, Y. Q. Wang, Y. X. Wei, Y. X. Zhu, Yang Zhang, Yanhong Xu, Yanhong Xu, Yanping Huang, Yao Li, Yao Zhao, Yaofeng Sun, Yaohui Li, Yaohui Wang, Yi Yu, Yi Zheng, Yichao Zhang, Yifan Shi, Yiliang Xiong, Ying He, Ying Tang, Yishi Piao, Yisong Wang, Yixuan Tan, Yiyang Ma, Yiyuan Liu, Yongqiang Guo, Yu Wu, Yuan Ou, Yuchen Zhu, Yuduan Wang, Yue Gong, Yuheng Zou, Yujia He, Yukun Zha, Yunfan Xiong, Yunxian Ma, Yuting Yan, Yuxi-ang Luo, Yuxiang You, Yuxuan Liu, Yuyang Zhou, Z. F. Wu, Z. Z. Ren, Zehui Ren, Zhangli Sha, Zhe Fu, Zhean Xu, Zhen Huang, Zhen Zhang, Zhenda Xie, Zhengyan Zhang, Zhewen Hao, Zhibin Gou, Zhicheng Ma, Zhigang Yan, Zhihong Shao, Zhipeng Xu, Zhiyu Wu, Zhongyu Zhang, Zhuoshu Li, Zihui Gu, Zijia Zhu, Zijun Liu, Zilin Li, Ziwei Xie, Ziyang Song, Ziyi Gao, and Zizheng Pan. 2025. Deepseek-v3 technical report. Hannah Devinney, Jenny Björklund, and Henrik Björklund. 2022. Theories of "gender" in nlp bias research. Jwala Dhamala, Tony Sun, Varun Kumar, Satyapriya Krishna, Yada Pruksachatkun, Kai-Wei Chang, and Rahul Gupta. 2021. Bold: Dataset and metrics for measuring biases in open-ended language generation. In Proceed-ings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , FAccT ’21, page 862–872. ACM. Isabel O. Gallegos, Ryan A. Rossi, Joe Barrow, Md Mehrab Tanjim, Sungchul Kim, Franck Der-noncourt, Tong Yu, Ruiyi Zhang, and Nesreen K. Ahmed. 2024. Bias and fairness in large lan-guage models: A survey. Samuel Gehman, Suchin Gururangan, Maarten Sap, Yejin Choi, and Noah A. Smith. 2020. Real-toxicityprompts: Evaluating neural toxic degener-ation in language models. Harritxu Gete and Thierry Etchegoyhen. 2024. Does context help mitigate gender bias in neural machine translation? In Findings of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 14788–14794, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Harritxu Gete, Thierry Etchegoyhen, Gorka Labaka, Ander Corral, Xabier Saralegi, Nora Aranberri, David Ponce, Igor Ellakuria Santos, and Maite Martin. 2025. Tando +: corpus and base-lines for document-level machine translation in Basque–Spanish and Basque–French. Lan-guage Resources & Evaluation .Harritxu Gete, Thierry Etchegoyhen, David Ponce, Gorka Labaka, Nora Aranberri, Ander Corral, Xa-bier Saralegi, Igor Ellakuria, and Maite Martin. 2022. TANDO: A corpus for document-level ma-chine translation. In Proceedings of the Thir-teenth Language Resources and Evaluation Con-ference , pages 3026–3037, Marseille, France. European Language Resources Association. Javier Garcia Gilabert, Xixian Liao, Severino Da Dalt, Ella Bohman, Audrey Mash, Francesca De Luca Fornaciari, Irene Baucells, Joan Llop, Miguel Claramunt Argote, Carlos Escolano, and Maite Melero. 2025. From salamandra to sala-mandrata: Bsc submission for wmt25 general machine translation shared task. Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ah-mad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere, Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong, Cristian Can-ton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits, Danny Wyatt, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choud-hary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Di-nan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip Radenovic, Fran-cisco Guzmán, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Govind Thattai, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Han-nah Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jack Zhang, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala, Karthik Prasad, Kar-tikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini, Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Kushal Lakhotia, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Lau-rens van der Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo, Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Has-san, Naman Goyal, Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bash-lykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Ning Zhang, Olivier Duchenne, Onur Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Va-sic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong, Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Sil-veira Cabral, Robert Stojnic, Roberta Raileanu, Rohan Maheswari, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabas-appa, Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun So-nia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sha-ran Narang, Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Her-man, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Geor-giou, Thomas Scialom, Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vítor Albiero, Vladan Petrovic, Wei-wei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xiao-fang Wang, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xide Xia, Xin-feng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aayushi Srivastava, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Amos Teo, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Al-varado, Andrew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ram-chandani, Annie Dong, Annie Franco, Anuj Goyal, Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowd-hury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, As-saf Eisenman, Azadeh Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola, Bhargavi Paran-jape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Han-cock, Bram Wasti, Brandon Spence, Brani Sto-jkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina Mejia, Ce Liu, Chang-han Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai, Chris Tin-dal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Cynthia Gao, Da-mon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich, Di-dem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Hol-land, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine Mont-gomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Eric-Tuan Le, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Ar-caute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Filippos Kokkinos, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Grant Herman, Grigory Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hakan Inan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang, Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Goldman, Hongyuan Zhan, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Moly-bog, Igor Tufanov, Ilias Leontiadis, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman, James Ge-boski, James Kohli, Janice Lam, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jen-nifer Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shep-ard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kiran Jagadeesh, Kun Huang, Kunal Chawla, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva, Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Ma-dian Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson, Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally, Miao Liu, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Moham-mad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini San-thanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navy-ata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikhil Mehta, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli, Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux, Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao, Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Rangaprabhu Parthasarathy, Raymond Li, Re-bekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sachin Mehta, Sachin Siby, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Sa-tadru Pan, Saurabh Mahajan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lindsay, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shishir Patil, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudar-shan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Summer Deng, Sungmin Cho, Sunny Virk, Suraj Sub-ramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser, Tamara Best, Thilo Koehler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Timothy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Vic-toria Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish Ku-mar, Vishal Mangla, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Constable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yaniv Klein-man, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi, Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yu Zhao, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yunlu Li, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary De-Vito, Zef Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, Zhiwei Zhao, and Zhiyu Ma. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. Yufei Guo, Muzhe Guo, Juntao Su, Zhou Yang, Mengqiu Zhu, Hongfei Li, Mengyang Qiu, and Shuo Shuo Liu. 2024. Bias in large language models: Origin, evaluation, and mitigation. Katsumi Ibaraki, Winston Wu, Lu Wang, and Rada Mihalcea. 2024. Analyzing occupational distribu-tion representation in Japanese language mod-els. In Proceedings of the 2024 Joint Interna-tional Conference on Computational Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024) , pages 959–973, Torino, Italia. ELRA and ICCL. Jiho Jin, Jiseon Kim, Nayeon Lee, Haneul Yoo, Alice Oh, and Hwaran Lee. 2024. Kobbq: Korean bias benchmark for question answering. Sneha Kudugunta, Isaac Caswell, Biao Zhang, Xavier Garcia, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Katherine Lee, Derrick Xin, Aditya Kusupati, Romi Stella, Ankur Bapna, and Orhan Firat. 2023. Madlad-400: A multilingual and document-level large audited dataset. Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Ef-ficient memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. In Proceed-ings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Sys-tems Principles , SOSP ’23, page 611–626, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Ma-chinery. Shahar Levy, Koren Lazar, and Gabriel Stanovsky. 2021. Collecting a large-scale gender bias dataset for coreference resolution and machine translation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021 , pages 2470–2480, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics. Orfeas Menis Mastromichalakis, Giorgos Filandri-anos, Maria Symeonaki, and Giorgos Stamou. 2025. Assumed identities: Quantifying gender bias in machine translation of gender-ambiguous occupational terms. Johanna Monti. 2020. Gender issues in machine translation: An unsolved problem? In Luise von Flotow and Hala Kamal, editors, The Routledge Handbook of Translation, Feminism and Gender ,pages 457–468. Routledge, London and New York. NLLB Team, Marta R. Costa-jussà, James Cross, Onur Çelebi, Maha Elbayad, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Heffernan, Elahe Kalbassi, Janice Lam, Daniel Licht, Jean Maillard, Anna Sun, Skyler Wang, Guillaume Wenzek, Al Youngblood, Bapi Akula, Loic Barrault, Gabriel Mejia Gonza-lez, Prangthip Hansanti, John Hoffman, Se-marley Jarrett, Kaushik Ram Sadagopan, Dirk Rowe, Shannon Spruit, Chau Tran, Pierre Andrews, Necip Fazil Ayan, Shruti Bhosale, Sergey Edunov, Angela Fan, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Francisco Guzmán, Philipp Koehn, Alexandre Mourachko, Christophe Rop-ers, Safiyyah Saleem, Holger Schwenk, and Jeff Wang. 2024. Scaling neural machine translation to 200 languages. Nature , 630(8018):841–846. Abigail Oppong, Hellina Hailu Nigatu, and Chi-nasa T. Okolo. 2025. Examining the cultural en-coding of gender bias in LLMs for low-resourced African languages. In Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural Language Processing (GeBNLP) , pages 358–378, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Maja Popović. 2017. chrF++: words helping charac-ter n-grams. In Proceedings of the Second Con-ference on Machine Translation , pages 612–618, Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Matt Post. 2018. A call for clarity in reporting bleu scores. In Proceedings of the Third Confer-ence on Machine Translation: Research Papers ,pages 186–191. Spencer Rarrick, Ranjita Naik, Sundar Poudel, and Vishal Chowdhary. 2024. Gate x-e : A chal-lenge set for gender-fair translations from weakly-gendered languages. Stefan Riezler and John T. Maxwell. 2005. On some pitfalls in automatic evaluation and signifi-cance testing for MT. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine Translation and/or Sum-marization , pages 57–64, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Association for Computational Linguistics. Rachel Rudinger, Jason Naradowsky, Brian Leonard, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2018. Gen-der bias in coreference resolution. Oscar Sainz, Naiara Perez, Julen Etxaniz, Joseba Fernandez de Landa, Itziar Aldabe, Iker García-Ferrero, Aimar Zabala, Ekhi Azurmendi, German Rigau, Eneko Agirre, et al. 2025. In-structing large language models for low-resource languages: A systematic study for basque. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07597 .Abel Salinas, Parth Shah, Yuzhong Huang, Robert McCormack, and Fred Morstatter. 2023. The unequal opportunities of large language models: Examining demographic biases in job recommen-dations by chatgpt and llama. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Conference on Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimization ,EAAMO ’23, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Londa Schiebinger. 2014. Scientific research must take gender into account. Nature , 507:9–9. Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, Rich Schwartz, Lin-nea Micciulla, and John Makhoul. 2006. A study of translation edit rate with targeted human an-notation. In Proceedings of the 7th Conference of the Association for Machine Translation in the Americas: Technical Papers , pages 223–231, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. Association for Machine Translation in the Americas. Ander Soraluze, Olatz Arregi, Xabier Arregi, Arantza Díaz de Ilarraza, Mijail Kabadjov, and Massimo Poesio. 2016. Coreference resolution for the Basque language with BART. In Proceed-ings of the Workshop on Coreference Resolu-tion Beyond OntoNotes (CORBON 2016) , pages 67–73, San Diego, California. Association for Computational Linguistics. Gabriel Stanovsky, Noah A. Smith, and Luke Zettle-moyer. 2019. Evaluating gender bias in machine translation. Samia Touileb, Lilja Øvrelid, and Erik Velldal. 2022. Occupational biases in Norwegian and multilin-gual language models. In Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural Language Processing (GeBNLP) , pages 200–211, Seat-tle, Washington. Association for Computational Linguistics. Eva Vanmassenhove, Christian Hardmeier, and Andy Way. 2018. Getting gender right in neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 3003–3008, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Kellie Webster, Marta Recasens, Vera Axelrod, and Jason Baldridge. 2018. Mind the GAP: A bal-anced corpus of gendered ambiguous pronouns. 

Transactions of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics , 6:605–617. Pardis Sadat Zahraei and Ali Emami. 2025. Trans-late with care: Addressing gender bias, neutrality, and reasoning in large language model transla-tions. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 476–501, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente Ordonez, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2018. Gender bias in coreference resolution: Evaluation and debiasing methods. Muitze Zulaika and Xabier Saralegi. 2025. BasqBBQ: A QA benchmark for assessing social biases in LLMs for Basque, a low-resource lan-guage. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 4753–4767, Abu Dhabi, UAE. Association for Computational Linguistics.